••ECOLOGY 
From Individuals to EcosystemsEIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page i•• ••EIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page ii•• ••ECOLOGY 
From Individuals to Ecosystems
MICHAEL BEGON
School of Biological Sciences,
The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
COLIN R. TOWNSEND
Department of Zoology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
JOHN L. HARPER
Chapel Road, Brampford Speke, Exeter, UK
FOURTH EDITIONEIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page iii•• ••© 1986, 1990, 1996, 2006 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
BLACKWELL PUBLISHING
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
The right of Mike Begon, Colin Townsend and John Harper to be identiﬁed as the Authors of this Work has been 
asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs, and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher
First edition published 1986 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Second edition published 1990Third edition published 1996Fourth edition published 2006
1 2006Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataBegon, Michael.
Ecology : from individuals to ecosystems / Michael Begon, Colin R. 
Townsend, John L. Harper.—4th ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4051-1117-1 (hard cover : alk. paper)ISBN-10: 1-4051-1117-8 (hard cover : alk. paper)1. Ecology. I. Townsend, Colin R. II. Harper, John L. III. Title.QH54.B416 2005577—dc22 2005004136
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library.
Set in 9.5/12 Dante MT
by Graphicraft Limited, Hong KongPrinted and bound in the United Kingdomby CPI Bath Press
The publisher’s policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate a sustainable forestry policy, 
and which has been manufatured from pulp processed using acid-free and elementary chlorine-free practices. Furthermore, the publisher ensures that the text paper and cover board used have met acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
For further information on
Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:www.blackwellpublishing.comEIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page iv•• ••Contents
Preface, vii
Introduction: Ecology and its Domain , xi
Part 1: Organisms
1 Organisms in their Environments: the Evolutionary Backdrop, 3
2 Conditions, 30
3 Resources, 584 Life, Death and Life Histories, 895 Intraspeciﬁc Competition, 1326 Dispersal, Dormancy and Metapopulations, 163
7 Ecological Applications at the Level of Organisms and Single-Species Populations: Restoration, Biosecurity
and Conservation, 186
Part 2: Species Interactions
8 Interspeciﬁc Competition, 2279 The Nature of Predation, 266
10 The Population Dynamics of Predation, 29711 Decomposers and Detritivores, 32612 Parasitism and Disease, 34713 Symbiosis and Mutualism, 38114 Abundance, 41015 Ecological Applications at the Level of Population Interactions: Pest Control and Harvest Management, 439EIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page v•• ••vi CONTENTS
Part 3: Communities and Ecosystems
16 The Nature of the Community: Patterns in Space and Time, 46917 The Flux of Energy through Ecosystems, 499
18 The Flux of Matter through Ecosystems, 525
19 The Inﬂuence of Population Interactions on Community Structure, 550
20 Food Webs, 578
21 Patterns in Species Richness, 60222 Ecological Applications at the Level of Communities and Ecosystems: Management Based on the Theory of
Succession, Food Webs, Ecosystem Functioning and Biodiversity , 633
References, 659Organism Index, 701Subject Index, 714Color plate section between pp. 000 and 000EIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page vi•• ••A science for everybody – but not an easy science
This book is about the distribution and abundance of different
types of organism, and about the physical, chemical but especiallythe biological features and interactions that determine these distributions and abundances.
Unlike some other sciences, the subject matter of ecology is
apparent to everybody: most people have observed and pondered
nature, and in this sense most people are ecologists of sorts. Butecology is not an easy science. It must deal explicitly with threelevels of the biological hierarchy – the organisms, the populationsof organisms, and the communities of populations – and, as we shall see, it ignores at its peril the details of the biology ofindividuals, or the pervading inﬂuences of historical, evolution-ary and geological events. It feeds on advances in our knowledgeof biochemistry, behavior, climatology, plate tectonics and so on,
but it feeds back to our understanding of vast areas of biologytoo. If, as T. H. Dobzhansky said, ‘Nothing in biology makes sense, except in the light of evolution’, then, equally, very littlein evolution, and hence in biology as a whole, makes senseexcept in the light of ecology.
Ecology has the distinction of being peculiarly confronted
with uniqueness: millions of different species, countless billionsof genetically distinct individuals, all living and interacting in avaried and ever-changing world. The challenge of ecology is todevelop an understanding of very basic and apparent problems,in a way that recognizes this uniqueness and complexity, but seekspatterns and predictions within this complexity rather than beingswamped by it. As L. C. Birch has pointed out, Whitehead’s recipe
for science is never more apposite than when applied to ecology:seek simplicity, but distrust it.Nineteen years on: applied ecology has 
come of age
This fourth edition comes fully 9 years after its immediate pre-
decessor and 19 years after the ﬁrst edition. Much has changed –in ecology, in the world around us, and even (strange to report!)in we authors. The Preface to the ﬁrst edition began: ‘As the cavepainting on the front cover of this book implies, ecology, if not
the oldest profession, is probably the oldest science’, followed bya justiﬁcation that argued that the most primitive humans had tounderstand, as a matter of necessity, the dynamics of the envir-onment in which they lived. Nineteen years on, we have tried tocapture in our cover design both how much and how little haschanged. The cave painting has given way to its modern equi-valent: urban grafﬁti. As a species, we are still driven to broadcastour feelings graphically and publicly for others to see. But simple, factual depictions have given way to urgent statements
of frustration and aggression. The human subjects are no longermere participants but either perpetrators or victims.
Of course, it has taken more than 19 years to move from 
man-the-cave-painter to man-the-grafﬁti-artist. But 19 years agoit seemed acceptable for ecologists to hold a comfortable, object-ive, not to say aloof position, in which the animals and plantsaround us were simply material for which we sought a scientiﬁcunderstanding. Now, we must accept the immediacy of the environmental problems that threaten us and the responsibilityof ecologists to come in from the sidelines and play their full partin addressing these problems. Applying ecological principles is notonly a practical necessity, but also as scientiﬁcally challenging asderiving those principles in the ﬁrst place, and we have included
three new ‘applied’ chapters in this edition, organized around thePrefaceEIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page viiviii PREFACE
three sections of the book: applications at the level of individual
organisms and of single-species populations, of species inter-actions, and of whole communities and ecosystems. But weremain wedded to the belief that environmental action can onlyever be as sound as the ecological principles on which it is based.
Hence, while the remaining chapters are still largely about theprinciples themselves rather than their application, we believe thatthe whole of this book is aimed at improving preparedness for
addressing the environmental problems of the new millennium.
Ecology ’secological niche
We would be poor ecologists indeed if we did not believe that
the principles of ecology apply to all facets of the world aroundus and all aspects of human endeavor. So, when we wrote the ﬁrstedition of Ecology , it was a generalist book, designed to overcome
the opposition of all competing textbooks. Much more recently,
we have been persuaded to use our ‘big book’ as a springboardto produce a smaller, less demanding text, Essentials of Ecology (also
published by Blackwell Publishing!), aimed especially at the ﬁrstyear of a degree program and at those who may, at that stage,be taking the only ecology course they will ever take.
This, in turn, has allowed us to engineer a certain amount of
‘niche differentiation’. With the ﬁrst years covered by Essentials ,
we have been freer to attempt to make this fourth edition an up-to-date guide to ecology now (or, at least, when it was written).
To this end, the results from around 800 studies have been
newly incorporated into the text, most of them published sincethe third edition. None the less, we have shortened the text byaround 15%, mindful that for many, previous editions havebecome increasingly overwhelming, and that, clichéd as it maybe, less is often more. We have also consciously attempted,while including so much modern work, to avoid bandwagons thatseem likely to have run into the buffers by the time many willbe using the book. Of course, we may also, sadly, have excludedbandwagons that go on to fulﬁl their promise.
Having said this, we hope, still, that this edition will be of value
to all those whose degree program includes ecology and all whoare, in some way, practicing ecologists. Certain aspects of the 
subject, particularly the mathematical ones, will prove difﬁcult forsome, but our coverage is designed to ensure that wherever ourreaders’ strengths lie – in the ﬁeld or laboratory, in theory or inpractice – a balanced and up-to-date view should emerge.
Different chapters of this book contain different proportions
of descriptive natural history, physiology, behavior, rigorous laboratory and ﬁeld experimentation, careful ﬁeld monitoring and censusing, and mathematical modeling (a form of simplicity that it is essential to seek but equally essential to distrust). Thesevarying proportions to some extent reﬂect the progress made indifferent areas. They also reﬂect intrinsic differences in variousaspects of ecology. Whatever progress is made, ecology willremain a meeting-ground for the naturalist, the experimentalist,
the ﬁeld biologist and the mathematical modeler. We believe thatall ecologists should to some extent try to combine all these facets.
Technical and pedagogical features
One technical feature we have retained in the book is the incor-
poration of marginal es as signposts throughout the text. These,we hope, will serve a number of purposes. In the ﬁrst place, theyconstitute a series of subheadings highlighting the detailed struc-ture of the text. However, because they are numerous and often
informative in their own right, they can also be read in sequencealong with the conventional subheadings, as an outline of eachchapter. They should act too as a revision aid for students – indeed,they are similar to the annotations that students themselvesoften add to their textbooks. Finally, because the marginal notesgenerally summarize the take-home message of the paragraph or paragraphs that they accompany, they can act as a continuousassessment of comprehension: if you can see that the signpost is the take-home message of what you have just read, then you
have understood. For this edition, though, we have also added a brief summary to each chapter, that, we hope, may allow readers to either orient and prepare themselves before theyembark on the chapter or to remind themselves where they have just been.
So: to summarize and, to a degree, reiterate some key features
of this fourth edition, they are:
• marginal notes throughout the text
• summaries of all chapters• around 800 newly-incorporated studies• three new chapters on applied ecology
• a reduction in overall length of around 15%• a dedicated website (www.blackwellpublishing.com/begon),
twinned with that for Essentials of Ecology , including inter-
active mathematical models, an extensive glossary, copies of artwork in the text, and links to other ecological sites
• an up-dating and redrawing of all artwork, which is also avail-
able to teachers on a CD-ROM for ease of incorporation intolecture material.
Acknowledgements
Finally, perhaps the most profound alteration to the construction
of this book in its fourth edition is that the revision has been thework of two rather than three of us. John Harper has very rea-sonably decided that the attractions of retirement and grand-fatherhood outweigh those of textbook co-authorship. For the two
of us who remain, there is just one beneﬁt: it allows us to recordpublicly not only what a great pleasure it has been to have 
•• ••EIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page viiiPREFACE ix
collaborated with John over so many years, but also just how much
we learnt from him. We cannot promise to have absorbed or, tobe frank, to have accepted, every one of his views; and we hope in particular, in this fourth edition, that we have not strayed too far from the paths through which he has guided us. But if readers
recognize any attempts to stimulate and inspire rather than simply to inform, to question rather than to accept, to respectour readers rather than to patronize them, and to avoid unques-tioning obedience to current reputation while acknowledgingour debt to the masters of the past, then they will have identiﬁedJohn’s intellectual legacy still ﬁrmly imprinted on the text.
In previous editions we thanked the great many friends 
and colleagues who helped us by commenting on various draftsof the text. The effects of their contributions are still strongly 
evident in the present edition. This fourth edition was also readby a series of reviewers, to whom we are deeply grateful. Severalremained anonymous and so we cannot thank them by name,but we are delighted to be able to acknowledge the help of 
Jonathan Anderson, Mike Bonsall, Angela Douglas, ChrisElphick, Valerie Eviner, Andy Foggo, Jerry Franklin, KevinGaston, Charles Godfray, Sue Hartley, Marcel Holyoak, JimHone, Peter Hudson, Johannes Knops, Xavier Lambin, Svata
Louda, Peter Morin, Steve Ormerod, Richard Sibly, AndrewWatkinson, Jacob Weiner, and David Wharton. At Blackwell, and in the production stage, we were particularly helped andencouraged by Jane Andrew, Elizabeth Frank, Rosie Hayden, DeliaSandford and Nancy Whilton.
This book is dedicated to our families – by Mike to Linda, Jessica
and Robert, and by Colin to Laurel, Dominic, Jenny andBrennan, and especially to the memory of his mother, JeanEvelyn Townsend.
Mike Begon
Colin Townsend
•• ••EIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page ix•• ••EIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page x•• ••Deﬁnition and scope of ecology
The word ‘ecology’ was ﬁrst used by Ernest Haeckel in 1869.
Paraphrasing Haeckel we can describe ecology as the scientiﬁcstudy of the interactions between organisms and their environ-ment. The word is derived from the Greek oikos , meaning
‘home’. Ecology might therefore be thought of as the study of
the ‘home life’ of living organisms. A less vague deﬁnition wassuggested by Krebs (1972): ‘Ecology is the scientiﬁc study of the interactions that determine the distribution and abundanceof organisms’. Notice that Krebs’ deﬁnition does not use the word‘environment’; to see why, it is necessary to deﬁne the word. The environment of an organism consists of all those factors andphenomena outside the organism that inﬂuence it, whether theseare physical and chemical (abiotic) or other organisms (biotic). The‘interactions’ in Krebs’ deﬁnition are, of course, interactions with
these very factors. The environment therefore retains the centralposition that Haeckel gave it. Krebs’ deﬁnition has the merit ofpinpointing the ultimate subject matter of ecology: the distribu-tion and abundance of organisms – where organisms occur, how
many occur there, and why. This being so, it might be better still
to deﬁne ecology as:
the scientiﬁc study of the distribution and abundance oforganisms and the interactions that determine distributionand abundance.
As far as the subject matter of ecology is concerned, ‘the distribution and abundance of organisms’ is pleasantly succinct.
But we need to expand it. The living world can be viewed as abiological hierarchy that starts with subcellular particles, andcontinues up through cells, tissues and organs. Ecology deals with the next three levels: the individual organism , the population
(consisting of individuals of the same species) and the community(consisting of a greater or lesser number of species populations).
At the level of the organism, ecology deals with how individualsare affected by (and how they affect) their environment. At thelevel of the population, ecology is concerned with the presenceor absence of particular species, their abundance or rarity, andwith the trends and ﬂuctuations in their numbers. Communityecology then deals with the composition and organization of 
ecological communities. Ecologists also focus on the pathways 
followed by energy and matter as these move among living and nonliving elements of a further category of organization: the ecosystem , comprising the community together with its 
physical environment. With this in mind, Likens (1992) wouldextend our preferred deﬁnition of ecology to include ‘the interactions between organisms and the transformation and ﬂux of energy and matter’. However, we take energy/matter 
transformations as being subsumed in the ‘interactions’ of ourdeﬁnition.
There are two broad approaches that ecologists can take at
each level of ecological organization. First, much can be gainedby building from properties at the level below: physiology whenstudying organismal ecology; individual clutch size and survivalprobabilities when investigating the dynamics of individual speciespopulations; food consumption rates when dealing with inter-actions between predator and prey populations; limits to the similarity of coexisting species when researching communities, andso on. An alternative approach deals directly with properties ofthe level of interest – for example, niche breadth at the organis-mal level; relative importance of density-dependent processes atthe population level; species diversity at the level of community;
rate of biomass production at the ecosystem level – and tries torelate these to abiotic or biotic aspects of the environment. Bothapproaches have their uses, and both will be used in each of thethree parts of this book: Organisms; Species Interactions; andCommunities and Ecosystems.Introduction: Ecology and 
its DomainEIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page xi••xii INTRODUCTION: ECOLOGY AND ITS DOMAIN
Explanation, description, prediction and control
At all levels of ecological organization we can try to do a num-
ber of different things. In the ﬁrst place we can try to explain or
understand . This is a search for knowledge in the pure scientiﬁc
tradition. In order to do this, however, it is necessary ﬁrst to describe .
This, too, adds to our knowledge of the living world. Obviously,
in order to understand something, we must ﬁrst have a descrip-tion of whatever it is that we wish to understand. Equally, butless obviously, the most valuable descriptions are those carriedout with a particular problem or ‘need for understanding’ in mind.All descriptions are selective: but undirected description, carriedout for its own sake, is often found afterwards to have selectedthe wrong things.
Ecologists also often try to predict what will happen to an 
organism, a population, a community or an ecosystem under a
particular set of circumstances: and on the basis of these predic-tions we try to control the situation. We try to minimize the effects
of locust plagues by predicting when they are likely to occur andtaking appropriate action. We try to protect crops by predictingwhen conditions will be favorable to the crop and unfavorableto its enemies. We try to maintain endangered species by predicting the conservation policy that will enable them to persist. We try to conserve biodiversity to maintain ecosystem‘services’ such as the protection of chemical quality of naturalwaters. Some prediction and control can be carried out withoutexplanation or understanding. But conﬁdent predictions, precise predictions and predictions of what will happen in unusual circumstances can be made only when we can explain what is
going on. Mathematical modeling has played, and will continueto play, a crucial role in the development of ecology, particularlyin our ability to predict outcomes. But it is the real world we areinterested in, and the worth of models must always be judged interms of the light they shed on the working of natural systems.
It is important to realize that there are two different classes
of explanation in biology: proximal and ultimate explanations. Forexample, the present distribution and abundance of a particularspecies of bird may be ‘explained’ in terms of the physical environ-ment that the bird tolerates, the food that it eats and the para-sites and predators that attack it. This is a proximal explanation.
However, we may also ask how this species of bird comes to havethese properties that now appear to govern its life. This questionhas to be answered by an explanation in evolutionary terms. Theultimate explanation of the present distribution and abundance of
this bird lies in the ecological experiences of its ancestors. Thereare many problems in ecology that demand evolutionary, ultimate
explanations: ‘How have organisms come to possess particular combinations of size, developmental rate, reproductive output andso on?’ (Chapter 4), ‘What causes predators to adopt particularpatterns of foraging behavior?’ (Chapter 9) and ‘How does it comeabout that coexisting species are often similar but rarely thesame?’ (Chapter 19). These problems are as much part of modern
ecology as are the prevention of plagues, the protection of crops
and the preservation of rare species. Our ability to control andexploit ecosystems cannot fail to be improved by an ability toexplain and understand. And in the search for understanding, wemust combine both proximal and ultimate explanations.
Pure and applied ecology
Ecologists are concerned not only with communities, populations
and organisms in nature , but also with manmade or human-
inﬂuenced environments (plantation forests, wheat ﬁelds, grainstores, nature reserves and so on), and with the consequences of human inﬂuence on nature (pollution, overharvesting, global
climate change). In fact, our inﬂuence is so pervasive that we would
be hard pressed to ﬁnd an environment that was totally unaffectedby human activity. Environmental problems are now high on thepolitical agenda and ecologists clearly have a central role to play:a sustainable future depends fundamentally on ecological under-standing and our ability to predict or produce outcomes underdifferent scenarios.
When the ﬁrst edition of this text was published in 1986, the
majority of ecologists would have classed themselves as pure 
scientists, defending their right to pursue ecology for its own sakeand not wishing to be deﬂected into narrowly applied projects.The situation has changed dramatically in 20 years, partly becausegovernments have shifted the focus of grant-awarding bodiestowards ecological applications, but also, and more fundamentally,because ecologists have themselves responded to the need to directmuch of their research to the many environmental problems thathave become ever more pressing. This is recognized in this newedition by a systematic treatment of ecological applications – eachof the three sections of the book concludes with an applied chapter. We believe strongly that the application of ecological theory must be based on a sophisticated understanding of the purescience. Thus, our ecological application chapters are organized
around the ecological understanding presented in the earlierchapters of each section.EIPA01  10/24/05  1:36 PM  Page xii••Introduction
We have chosen to start this book with chapters about organ-
isms, then to consider the ways in which they interact with eachother, and lastly to consider the properties of the communitiesthat they form. One could call this a ‘constructive’ approach. Wecould though, quite sensibly, have treated the subject the other
way round – starting with a discussion of the complex com-munities of both natural and manmade habitats, proceeding todeconstruct them at ever ﬁner scales, and ending with chapters
on the characteristics of the individual organisms – a more analytical approach. Neither is ‘correct’. Our approach avoids having to describe community patterns before discussing thepopulations that comprise them. But when we start with individualorganisms, we have to accept that many of the environmentalforces acting on them, especially the species with which they 
coexist, will only be dealt with fully later in the book.
This ﬁrst section covers individual organisms and populations
composed of just a single species. We consider initially the sortsof correspondences that we can detect between organisms andthe environments in which they live. It would be facile to startwith the view that every organism is in some way ideally ﬁttedto live where it does. Rather, we emphasize in Chapter 1 that organisms frequently are as they are, and live where they do,because of the constraints imposed by their evolutionary history.All species are absent from almost everywhere, and we considernext, in Chapter 2, the ways in which environmental conditionsvary from place to place and from time to time, and how theseput limits on the distribution of particular species. Then, in
Chapter 3, we look at the resources that different types of organisms consume, and the nature of their interactions with these resources.
The particular species present in a community, and their
abundance, give that community much of its ecological interest.Abundance and distribution (variation in abundance from place
to place) are determined by the balance between birth, death, immi-
gration and emigration. In Chapter 4 we consider some of thevariety in the schedules of birth and death, how these may bequantiﬁed, and the resultant patterns in ‘life histories’: lifetimeproﬁles of growth, differentiation, storage and reproduction. InChapter 5 we examine perhaps the most pervasive interaction acting within single-species populations: intraspeciﬁc competitionfor shared resources in short supply. In Chapter 6 we turn to move-
ment: immigration and emigration. Every species of plant and animal has a characteristic ability to disperse. This determines therate at which individuals escape from environments that are orbecome unfavorable, and the rate at which they discover sites that are ripe for colonization and exploitation. The abundance or rarity of a species may be determined by its ability to disperse (or migrate) to unoccupied patches, islands or continents. Finally in this section, in Chapter 7, we consider the application of theprinciples that have been discussed in the preceding chapters, includ-ing niche theory, life history theory, patterns of movement, andthe dynamics of small populations, paying particular attention to restoration after environmental damage, biosecurity (resistingthe invasion of alien species) and species conservation.
Part 1
Organisms
EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 1••EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 2••1.1 Introduction: natural selection and
adaptation
From our deﬁnition of ecology in the Preface, and even from a
layman’s understanding of the term, it is clear that at the heartof ecology lies the relationship between organisms and theirenvironments. In this opening chapter we explain how, funda-mentally, this is an evolutionary relationship. The great Russian–
American biologist Theodosius Dobzhansky famously said:‘Nothing in biology makes sense, except in the light of evolution’.This is as true of ecology as of any other aspect of biology. Thus,we try here to explain the processes by which the properties of different sorts of species make their life possible in particularenvironments, and also to explain their failure to live in other environments. In mapping out this evolutionary backdrop to thesubject, we will also be introducing many of the questions thatare taken up in detail in later chapters.
The phrase that, in everyday speech, is most commonly used
to describe the match between organisms and environment is:
‘organism X is adapted to’ followed by a description of where theorganism is found. Thus, we often hear that ‘ﬁsh are adapted tolive in water’, or ‘cacti are adapted to live in conditions of drought’.In everyday speech, this may mean very little: simply that ﬁsh havecharacteristics that allow them to live in water (and perhaps excludethem from other environments) or that cacti have characteristicsthat allow them to live where water is scarce. The word ‘adapted’here says nothing about how the characteristics were acquired.
For an ecologist or evolutionary
biologist, however, ‘X is adapted tolive in Y’ means that environment Y has
provided forces of natural selection
that have affected the life of X’s ancestors and so have moldedand specialized the evolution of X. ‘Adaptation’ means thatgenetic change has occurred.
Regrettably, though, the word ‘ adaptation’ implies that
organisms are matched totheir present environments, suggest-ing ‘design’ or even ‘prediction’. But organisms have not been
designed for, or ﬁtted to the present: they have been molded (by natural selection ) by past environments. Their characteristics
reﬂect the successes and failures of ancestors. They appear to be apt for the environments that they live in at present only because present environments tend to be similar to those of the past.
The theory of evolution by natural selection is an ecological
theory. It was ﬁrst elaborated by Charles Darwin (1859), though
its essence was also appreciated by a contemporary and corres-pondent of Darwin’s, Alfred RussellWallace (Figure 1.1). It rests on a seriesof propositions.
1The individuals that make up a population of a species are not
identical : they vary, although sometimes only slightly, in size,
rate of development, response to temperature, and so on.
2Some, at least, of this variation is heritable. In other words, 
the characteristics of an individual are determined to some 
extent by its genetic make-up. Individuals receive their genes from their ancestors and therefore tend to share theircharacteristics.
3All populations have the potential to populate the whole earth,
and they would do so if each individual survived and each indi-vidual produced its maximum number of descendants. But theydo not: many individuals die prior to reproduction, and most(if not all) reproduce at a less than maximal rate.
4Different ancestors leave different numbers of descendants. This
means much more than saying that different individuals produce
different numbers of offspring. It includes also the chances of survival of offspring to reproductive age, the survival andreproduction of the progeny of these offspring, the survivaland reproduction of their offspring in turn, and so on.
5Finally, the number of descendants that an individual leavesdepends, not entirely but crucially, on the interaction between
the characteristics of the individual and its environment .
the meaning of
adaptationevolution by naturalselection
Chapter 1
Organisms in 
their Environments: 
the Evolutionary BackdropEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 34 CHAPTER 1
In any environment, some individuals will tend to survive 
and reproduce better, and leave more descendants, than others.
If, because of this, the heritable characteristics of a populationchange from generation to generation, then evolution by nat-ural selection is said to have occurred. This is the sense in which
nature may loosely be thought of as selecting. But nature does not
select in the way that plant and animal breeders select. Breedershave a deﬁned end in view – bigger seeds or a faster racehorse.But nature does not actively select in this way: it simply sets the
scene within which the evolutionary play of differential survivaland reproduction is played out.
The ﬁttest individuals in a popula-
tion are those that leave the greatestnumber of descendants. In practice,the term is often applied not to a single individual, but to a typ-
ical individual or a type. For example, we may say that in sanddunes, yellow-shelled snails are ﬁtter than brown-shelled snails.Fitness , then, is a relative not an absolute term. The ﬁttest indi-
viduals in a population are those that leave the greatest number
of descendants relative to the number of descendants left by
other individuals in the population.
When we marvel at the diversity 
of complex specializations, there is atemptation to regard each case as anexample of evolved perfection. But this would be wrong. The evolutionary process works on the genetic variation that is avail-able. It follows that natural selection is unlikely to lead to the evolution of perfect, ‘maximally ﬁt’ individuals. Rather, organisms
•• ••
Figure 1.1 (a) Charles Darwin, 1849 (lithograph by Thomas H.
Maguire; courtesy of The Royal Institution, London,
UK/Bridgeman Art Library). (b) Alfred Russell Wallace, 1862(courtesy of the Natural History Museum, London).
ﬁtness: it’s all relativeevolved perfection?
no(a) (b)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 4THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 5
come to match their environments by being ‘the ﬁttest available’
or ‘the ﬁttest yet’: they are not ‘the best imaginable’. Part of thelack of ﬁt arises because the present properties of an organismhave not all originated in an environment similar in everyrespect to the one in which it now lives. Over the course of its
evolutionary history (its phylogeny), an organism’s remote an-cestors may have evolved a set of characteristics – evolutionary‘baggage’ – that subsequently constrain future evolution. Formany millions of years, the evolution of vertebrates has been limited to what can be achieved by organisms with a ver-tebral column. Moreover, much of what we now see as precisematches between an organism and its environment may equallybe seen as constraints: koala bears live successfully on Eucalyptus
foliage, but, from another perspective, koala bears cannot live 
without Eucalyptus foliage.
1.2 Specialization within species
The natural world is not composed of a continuum of types of
organism each grading into the next: we recognize boundariesbetween one type of organism and another. Nevertheless, withinwhat we recognize as species (deﬁned below), there is often con-
siderable variation, and some of this is heritable. It is on such
intraspeciﬁc variation, after all, that plant and animal breeders (andnatural selection) work.
Since the environments experienced by a species in different
parts of its range are themselves different (to at least someextent), we might expect natural selection to have favored dif-ferent variants of the species at different sites. The word ‘ ecotype ’
was ﬁrst coined for plant populations (Turesson, 1922a, 1922b)to describe genetically determined differences between popula-tions within a species that reﬂect local matches between the
organisms and their environments. But evolution forces thecharacteristics of populations to diverge from each other only if:(i) there is sufﬁcient heritable variation on which selection canact; and (ii) the forces favoring divergence are strong enough tocounteract the mixing and hybridization of individuals from dif-ferent sites. Two populations will not diverge completely if theirmembers (or, in the case of plants, their pollen) are continuallymigrating between them and mixing their genes.
Local, specialized populations become differentiated most
conspicuously amongst organisms that are immobile for most oftheir lives. Motile organisms have a large measure of control overthe environment in which they live; they can recoil or retreat froma lethal or unfavorable environment and actively seek another.
Sessile, immobile organisms have no such freedom. They mustlive, or die, in the conditions where they settle. Populations of sessile organisms are therefore exposed to forces of natural selection in a peculiarly intense form.
This contrast is highlighted on the seashore, where the inter-
tidal environment continually oscillates between the terrestrial andthe aquatic. The ﬁxed algae, sponges, mussels and barnacles all
meet and tolerate life at the two extremes. But the mobileshrimps, crabs and ﬁsh track their aquatic habitat as it moves; whilstthe shore-feeding birds track their terrestrial habitat. The mobil-ity of such organisms enables them to match their environmentsto themselves. The immobile organism must match itself to itsenvironment.
1.2.1 Geographic variation within species: ecotypes
The sapphire rockcress, Arabis fecunda , is a rare perennial herb
restricted to calcareous soil outcrops in western Montana (USA)
– so rare, in fact, that there are just 19 existing populations separated into two groups (‘high elevation’ and ‘low elevation’)by a distance of around 100 km. Whether there is local adapta-
tion is of practical importance for conservation: four of the low elevation populations are under threat from spreading urbanareas and may require reintroduction from elsewhere if they areto be sustained. Reintroduction may fail if local adaptation is toomarked. Observing plants in their own habitats and checking for differences between them would not tell us if there was localadaptation in the evolutionary sense. Differences may simply bethe result of immediate responses to contrasting environmentsmade by plants that are essentially the same. Hence, high and low
elevation plants were grown together in a ‘common garden’, elim-inating any inﬂuence of contrasting immediate environments(McKay et al. , 2001). The low elevation sites were more prone to
drought; both the air and the soil were warmer and drier. Thelow elevation plants in the common garden were indeedsigniﬁcantly more drought tolerant (Figure 1.2).
On the other hand, local selection by
no means always overrides hybridization.For example, in a study of Chamaecrista
fasciculata , an annual legume from 
disturbed habitats in eastern NorthAmerica, plants were grown in a common garden that were derivedfrom the ‘home’ site or were transplanted from distances of 
0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000 and 2000 km (Galloway & Fenster, 2000). The study was replicated three times: in Kansas, Maryland andnorthern Illinois. Five characteristics were measured: germination,survival, vegetative biomass, fruit production and the number of fruit produced per seed planted. But for all characters in all replicates there was little or no evidence for local adaptation except at the very furthest spatial scales (e.g. Figure 1.3). Thereis ‘local adaptation’ – but it’s clearly not that local.
We can also test whether organisms have evolved to become
specialized to life in their local environment in reciprocal transplant
experiments: comparing their performance when they are grown‘at home’ (i.e. in their original habitat) with their performance‘away’ (i.e. in the habitat of others). One such experiment (con-cerning white clover) is described in the next section.
•• ••the balance between
local adaptation andhybridizationEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 56 CHAPTER 1
1.2.2 Genetic polymorphism
On a ﬁner scale than ecotypes, it 
may also be possible to detect levels of variation within populations. Such
variation is known as polymorphism.
Speciﬁcally, genetic polymorphism is ‘the occurrence together 
in the same habitat of two or more discontinuous forms of a speciesin such proportions that the rarest of them cannot merely be 
maintained by recurrent mutation or immigration’ (Ford, 1940).Not all such variation represents a match between organism andenvironment. Indeed, some of it may represent a mismatch, if,for example, conditions in a habitat change so that one form isbeing replaced by another. Such polymorphisms are called tran-sient. As all communities are always changing, much polymor-
phism that we observe in nature may be transient, representing
•• ••High
elevation3
2
1
0Water-use efficiency
(mols of CO2 gained per mol of H2O lost × 10–3)
Low
elevationHigh
elevation20
15
10
0Rosette height (mm)
Low
elevationHigh
elevation40
20
10
0Rosette diameter (mm)
Low
elevationP = 0.009 P = 0.0001 P = 0.001
530
Figure 1.2 When plants of the rare sapphire rockcress from low elevation (drought-prone) and high elevation sites were grown together
in a common garden, there was local adaptation: those from the low elevation site had signiﬁcantly better water-use efﬁciency a s well as
having both taller and broader rosettes. (From McKay et al. , 2001.)
2000 1000 100 10 1 0.1 00306090Germination (%)
Transplant distance (km)* *
transient
polymorphismsFigure 1.3 Percentage germination 
of local and transplanted Chamaecrista
fasciculata populations to test for local
adaptation along a transect in Kansas. Data
for 1995 and 1996 have been combined
because they do not differ signiﬁcantly.Populations that differ from the homepopulation at P<0.05 are indicated by an
asterisk. Local adaptation occurs at onlythe largest spatial scales. (From Galloway& Fenster, 2000.)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 6THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 7
the extent to which the genetic response of populations to 
environmental change will always be out of step with the environment and unable to anticipate changing circumstances – this is illustrated in the peppered moth example below.
Many polymorphisms, however, are
actively maintained in a population by
natural selection, and there are a num-ber of ways in which this may occur.
1Heterozygotes may be of superior ﬁtness , but because of the
mechanics of Mendelian genetics they continually generate lessﬁt homozygotes within the population. Such ‘heterosis’ isseen in human sickle-cell anaemia where malaria is prevalent.
The malaria parasite attacks red blood cells. The sickle-cell muta-tion gives rise to red cells that are physiologically imperfectand misshapen. However, sickle-cell heterozygotes are ﬁttestbecause they suffer only slightly from anemia and are littleaffected by malaria; but they continually generate homozygotesthat are either dangerously anemic (two sickle-cell genes) orsusceptible to malaria (no sickle-cell genes). None the less, thesuperior ﬁtness of the heterozygote maintains both types ofgene in the population (that is, a polymorphism).
2There may be gradients of selective forces favoring one form
(morph) at one end of the gradient, and another form at theother. This can produce polymorphic populations at inter-mediate positions in the gradient – this, too, is illustrated
below in the peppered moth study.
3There may be frequency-dependent selection in which each of 
the morphs of a species is ﬁttest when it is rarest (Clarke &Partridge, 1988). This is believed to be the case when rare colorforms of prey are ﬁt because they go unrecognized and aretherefore ignored by their predators.4Selective forces may operate in different directions within different
patches in the population. A striking example of this is provided
by a reciprocal transplant study of white clover ( Trifolium
repens ) in a ﬁeld in North Wales (UK). To determine whether
the characteristics of individuals matched local features of
their environment, Turkington and Harper (1979) removedplants from marked positions in the ﬁeld and multiplied theminto clones in the common environment of a greenhouse. Theythen transplanted samples from each clone into the place inthe sward of vegetation from which it had originally been taken(as a control), and also to the places from where all the others had been taken (a transplant). The plants were allowedto grow for a year before they were removed, dried andweighed. The mean weight of clover plants transplanted back
into their home sites was 0.89 g but at away sites it was only0.52 g, a statistically highly signiﬁcant difference. This providesstrong, direct evidence that clover clones in the pasture hadevolved to become specialized such that they performed bestin their local environment. But all this was going on within asingle population, which was therefore polymorphic.
In fact, the distinction between
local ecotypes and polymorphic popu-
lations is not always a clear one. Thisis illustrated by another study in NorthWales, where there was a gradation in
habitats at the margin between maritime cliffs and grazed pasture, and a common species, creeping bent grass ( Agrostis
stolonifera ), was present in many of the habitats. Figure 1.4 shows
a map of the site and one of the transects from which plants weresampled. It also shows the results when plants from the samplingpoints along this transect were grown in a common garden. The
•• ••Figure 1.4 (a) Map of Abraham’s Bosom,
the site chosen for a study of evolution
over very short distances. The darkercolored area is grazed pasture; the lighterareas are the cliffs falling to the sea. The
numbers indicate the sites from which thegrass Agrostis stolonifera was sampled. Note 
that the whole area is only 200 m long. (b) A vertical transect across the study areashowing the gradual change from pastureto cliff conditions. (c) The mean length of stolons produced in the experimentalgarden from samples taken from thetransect. (From Aston & Bradshaw, 1966.)the maintenance of
polymorphisms
no clear distinctionbetween localecotypes and apolymorphism
12345
N
0 200 m 100Irish
Sea(a)
1235
4
10030
2010
0Elevation (m)
0(b)
10050
25
0Stolon length (cm)
0(c)
Distance (m)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 78 CHAPTER 1
plants spread by sending out shoots along the ground surface
(stolons), and the growth of plants was compared by measuringthe lengths of these. In the ﬁeld, cliff plants formed only shortstolons, whereas those of the pasture plants were long. In the experi-mental garden, these differences were maintained, even though
the sampling points were typically only around 30 m apart – certainly within the range of pollen dispersal between plants. Indeed,the gradually changing environment along the transect wasmatched by a gradually changing stolon length, presumably witha genetic basis, since it was apparent in the common garden. Thus,even though the spatial scale was so small, the forces of selectionseem to outweigh the mixing forces of hybridization – but it is amoot point whether we should describe this as a small-scaleseries of local ecotypes or a polymorphic population maintained
by a gradient of selection.1.2.3 Variation within a species with manmade
selection pressures
It is, perhaps, not surprising that some of the most dramatic 
examples of local specialization within species (indeed of naturalselection in action) have been driven by manmade ecological forces,especially those of environmental pollution. These can providerapid change under the inﬂuence of powerful selection pressures.
Industrial melanism , for example, is the phenomenon in which black
or blackish forms of species have come to dominate populationsin industrial areas. In the dark individuals, a dominant gene is typ-ically responsible for producing an excess of the black pigmentmelanin. Industrial melanism is known in most industrialized coun-tries and more than 100 species of moth have evolved forms ofindustrial melanism.
•• ••f. insulariaf. carbonariaf. typica
Figure 1.5 Sites in Britain where the
frequencies of the pale ( forma typica ) and
melanic forms of Biston betularia were
recorded by Kettlewell and his colleagues.
In all more than 20,000 specimens were
examined. The principal melanic form(forma carbonaria ) was abundant near
industrial areas and where the prevailingwesterly winds carry atmospheric pollutionto the east. A further melanic form ( forma
insularia , which looks like an intermediate
form but is due to several different genescontrolling darkening) was also present but was hidden where the genes for forma
carbonaria were present. (From Ford, 1975.)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 8THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 9
The earliest recorded species to
evolve in this way was the peppered
moth ( Biston betularia ); the ﬁrst black
specimen in an otherwise pale popula-tion was caught in Manchester (UK) in
1848. By 1895, about 98% of the Manchester peppered moth popu-
lation was melanic. Following many more years of pollution, alarge-scale survey of pale and melanic forms of the peppered moth in Britain recorded more than 20,000 specimens between 1952 and 1970 (Figure 1.5). The winds in Britain are predominantly westerlies, spreading industrial pollutants (especially smoke andsulfur dioxide) toward the east. Melanic forms were concentratedtoward the east and were completely absent from the unpollutedwestern parts of England and Wales, northern Scotland and
Ireland. Notice from the ﬁgure, though, that many populationswere polymorphic: melanic and nonmelanic forms coexisted.Thus, the polymorphism seems to be a result both of environ-ments changing (becoming more polluted) – to this extent the poly-morphism is transient – and of there being a gradient of selectivepressures from the less polluted west to the more polluted east.
The main selective pressure appears to be applied by birds 
that prey on the moths. In ﬁeld experiments, large numbers ofmelanic and pale (‘typical’) moths were reared and released in equalnumbers. In a rural and largely unpolluted area of southernEngland, most of those captured by birds were melanic. In an industrial area near the city of Birmingham, most were typicals(Kettlewell, 1955). Any idea, however, that melanic forms were
favored simply because they were camouﬂaged against smoke-stained backgrounds in the polluted areas (and typicals werefavored in unpolluted areas because they were camouﬂagedagainst pale backgrounds) may be only part of the story. The mothsrest on tree trunks during the day, and nonmelanic moths are wellhidden against a background of mosses and lichens. Industrial pollution has not just blackened the moths’ background; sulfurdioxide, especially, has also destroyed most of the moss andlichen on the tree trunks. Thus, sulfur dioxide pollution may havebeen as important as smoke in selecting melanic moths.
In the 1960s, industrialized environments in Western Europe
and the United States started to change again, as oil and electricitybegan to replace coal, and legislation was passed to impose smoke-free zones and to reduce industrial emissions of sulfur dioxide.The frequency of melanic forms then fell back to near pre-Industrial levels with remarkable speed (Figure 1.6). Again, therewas transient polymorphism – but this time while populations wereen route in the other direction.
1.3 Speciation
It is clear, then, that natural selection can force populations of plants
and animals to change their character – to evolve. But none ofthe examples we have considered has involved the evolution ofa new species. What, then, justiﬁes naming two populations as
different species? And what is the process – ‘speciation’ – by which
two or more new species are formed from one original species?
1.3.1 What do we mean by a ‘species’?
Cynics have said, with some truth,
that a species is what a competent taxonomist regards as a species. Onthe other hand, back in the 1930s twoAmerican biologists, Mayr and Dobzhansky, proposed an empir-
ical test that could be used to decide whether two populationswere part of the same species or of two different species. Theyrecognized organisms as being members of a single species if theycould, at least potentially, breed together in nature to producefertile offspring. They called a species tested and deﬁned in thisway a biological species or biospecies . In the examples that we have
used earlier in this chapter we know that melanic and normal peppered moths can mate and that the offspring are fully fertile;this is also true of plants from the different types of Agrostis .T h e y
are all variations within species – not separate species.
In practice, however, biologists do not apply the Mayr–
Dobzhansky test before they recognize every species: there is 
simply not enough time or resources, and in any case, there arevast portions of the living world – most microorganisms, for example – where an absence of sexual reproduction makes a strictinterbreeding criterion inappropriate. What is more important is that the test recognizes a crucial element in the evolutionaryprocess that we have met already in considering specialization
•• ••industrial melanism
in the pepperedmoth100
80
60
40
20
0Frequency
1950 1960 1970
Year1980 1990 2000
Figure 1.6 Change in the frequency of the carbonaria form of the
peppered moth Biston betularia in the Manchester area since 1950.
Vertical lines show the standard error and the horizontal lines
show the range of years included. (After Cook et al. , 1999.)
biospecies: the Mayr–
Dobzhansky testEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 910 CHAPTER 1
within species. If the members of two populations are able to
hybridize, and their genes are combined and reassorted in theirprogeny, then natural selection can never make them truly dis-tinct. Although natural selection may tend to force a populationto evolve into two or more distinct forms, sexual reproduction
and hybridization mix them up again.
‘Ecological’ speciation is speciation
driven by divergent natural selection indistinct subpopulations (Schluter, 2001).The most orthodox scenario for this
comprises a number of stages (Figure 1.7). First, two subpopula-tions become geographically isolated and natural selection drivesgenetic adaptation to their local environments. Next, as a by-
product of this genetic differentiation, a degree of reproductive 
isolation builds up between the two. This may be ‘pre-zygotic’,
tending to prevent mating in the ﬁrst place (e.g. differences in courtship ritual), or ‘post-zygotic’: reduced viability, perhapsinviability, of the offspring themselves. Then, in a phase of ‘secondary contact ’, the two subpopulations re-meet. The hybrids
between individuals from the different subpopulations are nowof low ﬁtness, because they are literally neither one thing nor the other. Natural selection will then favor any feature in eithersubpopulation that reinforces reproductive isolation, especially
pre-zygotic characteristics, preventing the production of low-ﬁtness hybrid offspring. These breeding barriers then cement thedistinction between what have now become separate species.
It would be wrong, however, to
imagine that all examples of speciation
conform fully to this orthodox picture(Schluter, 2001). First, there may never 
be secondary contact. This would be pure ‘allopatric’ speciation(that is, with all divergence occurring in subpopulations in differ-
entplaces). Second, there is clearly room for considerable varia-
tion in the relative importances of pre-zygotic and post-zygoticmechanisms in both the allopatric and the secondary-contact
phases.
Most fundamentally, perhaps, there has been increasing sup-
port for the view that an allopatric phase is not necessary: thatis, ‘sympatric’ speciation is possible, with subpopulations diverg-
ing despite not being geographically separated from one another.Probably the most studied circumstance in which this seemslikely to occur (see Drès & Mallet, 2002) is where insects feed onmore than one species of host plant, and where each requires specialization by the insects to overcome the plant’s defenses.(Consumer resource defense and specialization are examinedmore fully in Chapters 3 and 9.) Particularly persuasive in this isthe existence of a continuum identiﬁed by Drès and Mallet: frompopulations of insects feeding on more than one host plant,
through populations differentiated into ‘host races’ (deﬁned by Drèsand Mallet as sympatric subpopulations exchanging genes at a rateof more than around 1% per generation), to coexisting, closelyrelated species. This reminds us, too, that the origin of a species,whether allopatric or sympatric, is a process, not an event. Forthe formation of a new species, like the boiling of an egg, thereis some freedom to argue about when it is completed.
The evolution of species and the balance between natural selec-
tion and hybridization are illustrated by the extraordinary case oftwo species of sea gull. The lesser black-backed gull ( Larus fuscus )
originated in Siberia and colonized progressively to the west, form-ing a chain or cline of different forms, spreading from Siberia to
Britain and Iceland (Figure 1.8). The neighboring forms along 
the cline are distinctive, but they hybridize readily in nature.Neighboring populations are therefore regarded as part of the samespecies and taxonomists give them only ‘subspeciﬁc’ status (e.g.L. fuscus graellsii, L. fuscus fuscus ). Populations of the gull have, how-
ever, also spread east from Siberia, again forming a cline of freelyhybridizing forms. Together, the populations spreading east andwest encircle the northern hemisphere. They meet and overlap
•• ••Space
Time12 3 4 a
4bFigure 1.7 The orthodox picture of
ecological speciation. A uniform species
with a large range (1) differentiates (2) intosubpopulations (for example, separated by geographic barriers or dispersed onto
different islands), which become geneticallyisolated from each other (3). Afterevolution in isolation they may meet again, when they are either already unableto hybridize (4a) and have become truebiospecies, or they produce hybrids oflower ﬁtness (4b), in which case evolutionmay favor features that preventinterbreeding between the ‘emerging
species’ until they are true biospecies.
orthodox ecological
speciation
allopatric andsympatric speciationEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 10THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 11
in northern Europe. There, the eastward and westward clines have
diverged so far that it is easy to tell them apart, and they are recognized as two different species , the lesser black-backed gull 
(L. fuscus ) and the herring gull ( L. argentatus ). Moreover, the two
species do not hybridize: they have become true biospecies. In
this remarkable example, then, we can see how two distinct specieshave evolved from one primal stock, and that the stages of theirdivergence remain frozen in the cline that connects them.
1.3.2 Islands and speciation
We will see repeatedly later in the
book (and especially in Chapter 21)that the isolation of islands – and not
just land islands in a sea of water – can have a profound effecton the ecology of the populations and communities living there.
Such isolation also provides arguably the most favorable envir-onment for populations to diverge into distinct species. Themost celebrated example of evolution and speciation on islandsis the case of Darwin’s ﬁnches in the Galápagos archipelago. TheGalápagos are volcanic islands isolated in the Paciﬁc Oceanabout 1000 km west of Ecuador and 750 km from the island ofCocos, which is itself 500 km from Central America. At more than500 m above sea level the vegetation is open grassland. Below thisis a humid zone of forest that grades into a coastal strip of desertvegetation with some endemic species of prickly pear cactus(Opuntia ). Fourteen species of ﬁnch are found on the islands. The
evolutionary relationships amongst them have been traced bymolecular techniques (analyzing variation in ‘microsatellite’DNA) (Figure 1.9) (Petren et al. , 1999). These accurate modern
tests conﬁrm the long-held view that the family tree of theGalápagos ﬁnches radiated from a single trunk: a single ancestralspecies that invaded the islands from the mainland of Central
America. The molecular data also provide strong evidence that
the warbler ﬁnch ( Certhidea olivacea ) was the ﬁrst to split off from
the founding group and is likely to be the most similar to the original colonist ancestors. The entire process of evolutionary divergence of these species appears to have happened in less than3 million years.
Now, in their remote island isolation, the Galápagos ﬁnches,
despite being closely related, have radiated into a variety of
species with contrasting ecologies (Figure 1.9), occupying ecologicalniches that elsewhere are ﬁlled by quite unrelated species. Mem-bers of one group, including Geospiza fuliginosa and G. fortis , have
strong bills and hop and scratch for seeds on the ground. G. scan-
dens has a narrower and slightly longer bill and feeds on the ﬂowers
and pulp of the prickly pears as well as on seeds. Finches of a thirdgroup have parrot-like bills and feed on leaves, buds, ﬂowers andfruits, and a fourth group with a parrot-like bill ( Camarhynchus
•• ••Figure 1.8 Two species of gull, the
herring gull and the lesser black-backed
gull, have diverged from a commonancestry as they have colonized andencircled the northern hemisphere. 
Where they occur together in northernEurope they fail to interbreed and areclearly recognized as two distinct species.However, they are linked along theirranges by a series of freely interbreedingraces or subspecies. (After Brookes, 1998.)Herring gull
Larus argentatus
argentatusLesser
black-backed gull
Larus fuscus graellsii
L. fuscus
fuscus
L. fuscus
heugline
L. argentatus
birulae
L. argentatus
vegaeL. argentatus
smithsonianusL. fuscus
antellus
Darwin’s ﬁnchesEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 11••12 CHAPTER 1
••14 g
20 g
34 g
21 g
28 g
20 g
13 g
20 g
18 g
21 g
34 g
8 g
13 g
10 gG. fuliginosa
G. fortis
G. magnirostris
G. scandens
G. conirostris
G. difficilis
C. parvulus
C. psittacula
C. pauper
C. pallida
P. crassirostris
Ce. fusca
Pi. inornata
Ce. olivaceaScratch
for seedson theground
Feed on
seeds on theground andthe flowers andpulp of prickly
pear ( Opuntia )
Feed in trees
on beetles
Use spines held
in the bill toextract insectsfrom bark crevices
Feed on leaves,
buds and seeds inthe canopy of trees
Warbler-like birdsfeeding on smallsoft insects(b)10°N
5°N
0°
90°W8 5 °W8 0 °WCulpepper
Wenman
PintaGalapágos
Santa Cruz
San Cristobal
Hood IsabelaFernandinaCocos IslandPearl
Is.(a)
Figure 1.9 (a) Map of the Galápagos
Islands showing their position relative 
to Central America; on the equator 5°equals approximately 560 km. (b) Areconstruction of the evolutionary 
history of the Galápagos ﬁnches based onvariation in the length of microsatellitedeoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). The feedinghabits of the various species are alsoshown. Drawings of the birds areproportional to actual body size. Themaximum amount of black coloring inmale plumage and the average body massare shown for each species. The genetic
distance (a measure of the genetic
difference) between species is shown by the
length of the horizontal lines. Notice thegreat and early separation of the warblerﬁnch ( Certhidea olivacea ) from the others,
suggesting that it may closely resemble the founders that colonized the islands. C, Camarhynchus ; Ce, Certhidea ; G, Geospiza ;
P, Platyspiza ; Pi, Pinaroloxias . (After Petren
et al. , 1999.)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 12••THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 13
psittacula ) has become insectivorous, feeding on beetles and
other insects in the canopy of trees. A so-called woodpecker
ﬁnch, Camarhynchus (Cactospiza ) pallida , extracts insects from
crevices by holding a spine or a twig in its bill, while yet a fur-ther group includes the warbler ﬁnch, which ﬂits around actively
and collects small insects in the forest canopy and in the air. Isolation– both of the archipelago itself and of individual islands within it– has led to an original evolutionary line radiating into a seriesof species, each matching its own environment.
1.4 Historical factors
Our world has not been constructed by someone taking each species
in turn, testing it against each environment, and molding it sothat every species ﬁnds its perfect place. It is a world in whichspecies live where they do for reasons that are often, at least inpart, accidents of history. We illustrate this ﬁrst by continuing our
examination of islands.
1.4.1 Island patterns
Many of the species on islands are either subtly or profoundly dif-
ferent from those on the nearest comparable area of mainland.Put simply, there are two main reasons for this.
1The animals and plants on an island are limited to those types
having ancestors that managed to disperse there, although theextent of this limitation depends on the isolation of the islandand the intrinsic dispersal ability of the animal or plant in question.
2Because of this isolation, as we saw in the previous section,the rate of evolutionary change on an island may often be fastenough to outweigh the effects of the exchange of genetic material between the island population and related populationselsewhere.
Thus, islands contain many species unique to themselves
(‘endemics ’ – species found in only one area), as well as many 
differentiated ‘races’ or ‘subspecies’ that are distinguishable from
mainland forms. A few individuals that disperse by chance to ahabitable island can form the nucleus of an expanding newspecies. Its character will have been colored by the particular genesthat were represented among the colonists – which are unlikelyto be a perfect sample of the parent population. What natural selection can do with this founder population is limited by what is
in its limited sample of genes (plus occasional rare mutations).Indeed much of the deviation among populations isolated on islands
appears to be due to a founder effect – the chance composition 
of the pool of founder genes puts limits and constraints on whatvariation there is for natural selection to act upon.The Drosophila fruit-ﬂies of Hawaii provide a further spec-
tacular example of species formation on islands. The Hawaiian
chain of islands (Figure 1.10) is volcanic in origin, having beenformed gradually over the last 40 million years, as the center of the Paciﬁc tectonic plate moved steadily over a ‘hot spot’ in asoutheasterly direction (Niihau is the most ancient of the islands,Hawaii itself the most recent). The richness of the HawaiianDrosophila is spectacular: there are probably about 1500 Drosophila
spp. worldwide, but at least 500 of these are found only in theHawaiian islands.
Of particular interest are the 100 
or so species of ‘picture-winged’ Droso-
phila . The lineages through which these species have evolved can
be traced by analyzing the banding patterns on the giant chro-
mosomes in the salivary glands of their larvae. The evolutionarytree that emerges is shown in Figure 1.10, with each species linedup above the island on which it is found (there are only two speciesfound on more than one island). The historical element in ‘whatlives where’ is plainly apparent: the more ancient species live onthe more ancient islands, and, as new islands have been formed,
rare dispersers have reached them and eventually evolved in tonew species. At least some of these species appear to match thesame environment as others on different islands. Of the closelyrelated species, for example, D. adiastola (species 8) is only found
on Maui and D. setosimentum (species 11) only on Hawaii, but the
environments that they live in are apparently indistinguishable(Heed, 1968). What is most noteworthy, of course, is the powerand importance of isolation (coupled with natural selection) in
generating new species. Thus, island biotas illustrate two import-ant, related points: (i) that there is a historical element in the matchbetween organisms and environments; and (ii) that there is notjust one perfect organism for each type of environment.
1.4.2 Movements of land masses
Long ago, the curious distributions of species between continents,
seemingly inexplicable in terms of dispersal over vast distances,led biologists, especially Wegener (1915), to suggest that the continents themselves must have moved. This was vigorouslydenied by geologists, until geomagnetic measurements required
the same, apparently wildly improbable explanation. The discoverythat the tectonic plates of the earth’s crust move and carry withthem the migrating continents, reconciles geologist and biologist(Figure 1.11b–e). Thus, whilst major evolutionary developmentswere occurring in the plant and animal kingdoms, populationswere being split and separated, and land areas were movingacross climatic zones.
Figure 1.12 shows just one example
of a major group of organisms (the
large ﬂightless birds), whose distributions begin to make sense only in the light of the movement of land masses. It would be
••Hawaiian Drosophila
large ﬂightless birdsEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 13•• ••14 CHAPTER 1
N62
9568
70545343
55
85
8676
9981
9177
84
897559
60
61
67
7469
8382
9790
948150
5249
514837 3536
38
394744
46
6658
8180
98punalua
group
(58–65)glabriapex
group
(34–57)
grimshawi group
(66–101)planitidia group
(17–33)
40
41
4222 21
25 24
26
272318
1917
20
343216 13
15146
4
5
1adiastola group
(3–16)
23
NiihauKauai
Oahu
LanaiMolokai
Maui
Kahoolawe
Hawaii63
64
65
71
72
73
78
79
87
88
92
93
96
100
101575645333130
29281089 7
1211
0 50 kmFigure 1.10 An evolutionary tree linking
the picture-winged Drosophila of Hawaii,
traced by the analysis of chromosomal
banding patterns. The most ancient speciesare D. primaeva (species 1) and D. attigua
(species 2), found only on the island of
Kauai. Other species are represented by solid circles; hypothetical species,needed to link the present day ones, arerepresented by open circles. Each specieshas been placed above the island or islandson which it is found (although Molokai,Lanai and Maui are grouped together).Niihau and Kahoolawe support no
Drosophila . (After Carson & Kaneshiro,
1976; Williamson, 1981.)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 14•• ••THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 15
(a) (b) 150 Myr ago
(e) 10 Myr ago(d) 32 Myr ago (c) 50 Myr ago030
20
10
0Paleotemperature (°C)
6552515
60 55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5
Millions of years agoPaleo-
cene EoceneOligo-
cene Miocene Pl
Tropical forest
Paratropical forest
(with dry season)
Subtropical woodland/
woodland savanna (broad-leaved evergreen)
Temperate woodland
(broad-leaved deciduous)
Temperate woodland
(mixed coniferous anddeciduous)
Woody savannaGrassland/open
savanna
Mediterranean-type
woodland/thorn scrub/chaparral
Polar broad-leaved
deciduous forest
Tundra
Ice
Figure 1.11 (a) Changes in temperature in the North Sea over the past 60 million years. During this period there were large changes 
in sea level (arrows) that allowed dispersal of both plants and animals between land masses. (b–e) Continental drift. (b) The a ncient
supercontinent of Gondwanaland began to break up about 150 million years ago. (c) About 50 million years ago (early Middle Eoce ne)
recognizable bands of distinctive vegetation had developed, and (d) by 32 million years ago (early Oligocene) these had become more
sharply deﬁned. (e) By 10 million years ago (early Miocene) much of the present geography of the continents had become establis hed but
with dramatically different climates and vegetation from today; the position of the Antarctic ice cap is highly schematic. (Ada pted from
Norton & Sclater, 1979; Janis, 1993; and other sources).EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 1516 CHAPTER 1
unwarranted to say that the emus and cassowaries are where they
are because they represent the best match to Australian envi-ronments, whereas the rheas and tinamous are where they are
because they represent the best match to South American envi-ronments. Rather, their disparate distributions are essentially
determined by the prehistoric movements of the continents, andthe subsequent impossibility of geographically isolated evolu-tionary lines reaching into each others’ environment. Indeed, molec-ular techniques make it possible to analyze the time at which thevarious ﬂightless birds started their evolutionary divergence(Figure 1.12). The tinamous seem to have been the ﬁrst todiverge and became evolutionarily separate from the rest, the ratites .
Australasia next split away from the other southern continents,and from the latter, the ancestral stocks of ostriches and rheas were
subsequently separated when the Atlantic opened up between Africaand South America. Back in Australasia, the Tasman Sea opened
up about 80 million years ago and ancestors of the kiwi are thoughtto have made their way, by island hopping, about 40 million yearsago across to New Zealand, where divergence into the presentspecies happened relatively recently. An account of the evolutionary
trends amongst mammals over much the same period is givenby Janis (1993).
1.4.3 Climatic changes
Changes in climate have occurred on shorter timescales than the
movements of land masses (Boden et al. , 1990; IGBP, 1990).
Much of what we see in the present distribution of species rep-resents phases in a recovery from past climatic shifts. Changes in
•• ••Ostrich
Tinamou
Rhea(a)
(b)EmuCassowaryKiwi
Tinamous
80 60 40 20 0Ostriches
Rheas
Brown kiwis (North Island)
Brown kiwis (South Island)
Greater spotted kiwis
Little spotted kiwis
Cassowaries
Emus
Myr
Figure 1.12 (a) The distribution 
of terrestrial ﬂightless birds. (b) The
phylogenetic tree of the ﬂightless birds and the estimated times (million years,Myr) of their divergence. (After Diamond,
1983; from data of Sibley & Ahlquist.)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 16THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 17
climate during the Pleistocene ice ages, in particular, bear a lot
of the responsibility for the present patterns of distribution of plantsand animals. The extent of these climatic and biotic changes isonly beginning to be unraveled as the technology for discover-ing, analyzing and dating biological remains becomes more
sophisticated (particularly by the analysis of buried pollen sam-ples). These methods increasingly allow us to determine justhow much of the present distribution of organisms represents aprecise local match to present environments, and how much isa ﬁngerprint left by the hand of history.
Techniques for the measurement of
oxygen isotopes in ocean cores indic-ate that there may have been as manyas 16 glacial cycles in the Pleistocene,
each lasting for about 125,000 years (Figure 1.13a). It seems that
each glacial phase may have lasted for as long as 50,000–100,000years, with brief intervals of 10,000–20,000 years when the tem-peratures rose close to those we experience today. This suggests
that it is present ﬂoras and faunas that are unusual, because theyhave developed towards the end of one of a series of unusual catas-trophic warm events!
During the 20,000 years since the peak of the last glaciation,
global temperatures have risen by about 8°C, and the rate at 
which vegetation has changed over much of this period has been detected by examining pollen records. The woody speciesthat dominate pollen proﬁles at Rogers Lake in Connecticut(Figure 1.13b) have arrived in turn: spruce ﬁrst and chestnut most recently. Each new arrival has added to the number of thespecies present, which has increased continually over the past14,000-year period. The same picture is repeated in Europeanproﬁles.
As the number of pollen records
has increased, it has become possible not
only to plot the changes in vegetation
•• ••
Temperature (°C)
Time (103 years ago)30
0 50 150 200 250(a)
20100 300 350 400
0(b)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0 0 0 0 0 10,000 0 0 500 0 0 0 500
2000
1000 300010,000
20,0002000
40001000
2000 5000 15,000500
20001000 1000
20001000Chestnut
Hickory
Beech
Hemlock
Oak
Pine
Pine
SprucePiceaSpruce PinusPine BetulaBirch TsugaHemlock QuercusOak Acer saccharumSugar maple Acer rubrumRed maple FagusBeech CaryaHickory CastaneaChestnut103 years ago
Figure 1.13 (a) An estimate of the temperature variations with time during glacial cycles over the past 400,000 years. The estimates were
obtained by comparing oxygen isotope ratios in fossils taken from ocean cores in the Caribbean. The dashed line corresponds to the ratio
10,000 years ago, at the start of the present warming period. Periods as warm as the present have been rare events, and the cli mate during
most of the past 400,000 years has been glacial. (After Emiliani, 1966; Davis, 1976.) (b) The proﬁles of pollen accumulated fro m late glacial
times to the present in the sediments of Rogers Lake, Connecticut. The estimated date of arrival of each species in Connecticut  is shown
by arrows at the right of the ﬁgure. The horizontal scales represent pollen inﬂux: 103grains cm−2year−1. (After Davis et al. , 1973.)the Pleistocene
glacial cycles . . .
. . . from which treesare still recoveringEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 1718 CHAPTER 1
at a point in space, but to begin to map the movements of the
various species as they have spread across the continents (seeBennet, 1986). In the invasions that followed the retreat of theice in eastern North America, spruce was followed by jack pine orred pine, which spread northwards at a rate of 350–500 m year
−1
for several thousands of years. White pine started its migrationabout 1000 years later, at the same time as oak. Hemlock wasalso one of the rapid invaders (200–300 m year
−1), and arrived at
most sites about 1000 years after white pine. Chestnut movedslowly (100 m year
−1), but became a dominant species once it had
arrived. Forest trees are still migrating into deglaciated areas, even now. This clearly implies that the timespan of an averageinterglacial period is too short for the attainment of ﬂoristic equilibrium (Davis, 1976). Such historical factors will have to be
borne in mind when we consider the various patterns in speciesrichness and biodiversity in Chapter 21.
‘History’ may also have an impact
on much smaller space and time scales.Disturbances to the benthic (bottomdwelling) community of a stream occurs
when high discharge events (associated with storms or snow melt)result in a very small-scale mosaic of patches of scour (substrateloss), ﬁll (addition of substrate) and no change (Matthaei et al. ,
1999). The invertebrate communities associated with the differ-
ent patch histories are distinctive for a period of months, withinwhich time another high discharge event is likely to occur. As withthe distribution of trees in relation to repeating ice ages, the streamfauna may rarely achieve an equilibrium between ﬂow disturbances(Matthaei & Townsend, 2000).
The records of climatic change in 
the tropics are far less complete thanthose for temperate regions. There istherefore the temptation to imagine
that whilst dramatic climatic shifts and ice invasions were dom-inating temperate regions, the tropics persisted in the state weknow today. This is almost certainly wrong. Data from a varietyof sources indicate that there were abrupt ﬂuctuations in post-
glacial climates in Asia and Africa. In continental monsoon areas(e.g. Tibet, Ethiopia, western Sahara and subequatorial Africa) the
postglacial period started with an extensive phase of high humid-
ity followed by a series of phases of intense aridity (Zahn, 1994).In South America, a picture is emerging of vegetational changes
that parallel those occurring in temperate regions, as the extentof tropical forest increased in warmer, wetter periods, and con-tracted, during cooler, drier glacial periods, to smaller patches surrounded by a sea of savanna. Support for this comes from the present-day distribution of species in the tropical forests of South America (Figure 1.14). There, particular ‘hot spots’ ofspecies diversity are apparent, and these are thought to be likelysites of forest refuges during the glacial periods, and sites too, there-
fore, of increased rates of speciation (Prance, 1987; Ridley, 1993).On this interpretation, the present distributions of species mayagain be seen as largely accidents of history (where the refugeswere) rather than precise matches between species and their dif-fering environments.
Evidence of changes in vegetation
that followed the last retreat of the icehint at the consequence of the global
warming (maybe 3°C in the next 100 years) that is predicted toresult from continuing increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide(discussed in detail in Sections 2.9.1 and 18.4.6). But the scales arequite different. Postglacial warming of about 8°C occurred over20,000 years, and changes in the vegetation failed to keep paceeven with this. But current projections for the 21st centuryrequire range shifts for trees at rates of 300–500 km per centurycompared to typical rates in the past of 20–40 km per century (andexceptional rates of 100–150 km). It is striking that the only pre-cisely dated extinction of a tree species in the Quaternary, thatof Picea critchfeldii , occurred around 15,000 years ago at a time of
especially rapid postglacial warming ( Jackson & Weng, 1999).Clearly, even more rapid change in the future could result in extinc-tions of many additional species (Davis & Shaw, 2001).
•• ••Napo
MadieraPeruEastImeriGuiana(b) (a)
Figure 1.14 (a) The present-day
distribution of tropical forest in South
America. (b) The possible distribution oftropical forest refuges at the time when thelast glaciation was at its peak, as judged by
present-day hot spots of species diversitywithin the forest. (After Ridley, 1993.)
‘history’ on a smaller
scale
changes in thetropicshow will globalwarming compare?EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 18THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 19
1.4.4 Convergents and parallels
A match between the nature of organ-
isms and their environment can oftenbe seen as a similarity in form and
behavior between organisms living in a similar environment, butbelonging to different phyletic lines (i.e. different branches of 
the evolutionary tree). Such similarities also undermine furtherthe idea that for every environment there is one, and only one,perfect organism. The evidence is particularly persuasive whenthe phyletic lines are far removed from each other, and when similar roles are played by structures that have quite different evolutionary origins, i.e. when the structures are analogous 
(similar in superﬁcial form or function) but not homologous
(derived from an equivalent structure in a common ancestry). When this is seen to occur, we speak of convergent evolution.
Many ﬂowering plants and some ferns, for example, use the 
support of others to climb high in the canopies of vegetation, andso gain access to more light than if they depended on their own
supporting tissues. The ability to climb has evolved in many dif-ferent families, and quite different organs have become modiﬁedinto climbing structures (Figure 1.15a): they are analogous struc-tures but not homologous. In other plant species the same organhas been modiﬁed into quite different structures with quite dif-ferent roles: they are therefore homologous, although they may
not be analogous (Figure 1.15b).
Other examples can be used to show the parallels in evolutionary
pathways within separate groups that have radiated after they were
isolated from each other. The classic example of such parallel evolution is the radiation amongst the placental and marsupialmammals. Marsupials arrived on the Australian continent in theCretaceous period (around 90 million years ago), when the onlyother mammals present were the curious egg-laying monotremes
(now represented only by the spiny anteaters ( Tachyglossus
aculeatus ) and the duckbill platypus ( Ornithorynchus anatinus )).
An evolutionary process of radiation then occurred that in many
•• ••
Dioscorea
(Dioscoreaceae),twiner
Calamus(Arecaceae), hooks
Clematis
(Ranunculaceae),twining petiole
Cobaea
(Cobaeaceae), tendril
Ficus (Moraceae),
adventitious roots
Parthenocissus
(Vitaceae),sticky pads(a)analogous and 
homologous structures
Figure 1.15 A variety of morphological
features that allow ﬂowering plants to
climb. (a) Structural features that areanalogous, i.e. derived from modiﬁcationsof quite different organs, e.g. leaves,
petioles, stems, roots and tendrils.EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 1920 CHAPTER 1
ways accurately paralleled what occurred in the placental 
mammals on other continents (Figure 1.16). The subtlety of the parallels in both the form of the organisms and their lifestyle isso striking that it is hard to escape the view that the environmentsof placentals and marsupials provided similar opportunities to 
which the evolutionary processes of the two groups respondedin similar ways.
1.5 The match between communities and 
their environments
1.5.1 Terrestrial biomes of the earth
Before we examine the differences and similarities between com-
munities, we need to consider the larger groupings, ‘biomes’, inwhich biogeographers recognize marked differences in the ﬂoraand fauna of different parts of the world. The number of biomes
that are distinguished is a matter of taste. They certainly grade
into one another, and sharp boundaries are a convenience for cartographers rather than a reality of nature. We describe eightterrestrial biomes and illustrate their global distribution in Figure 1.17, and show how they may be related to annual temperature and precipitation (Figure 1.18) (see Woodward,1987 for a more detailed account). Apart from anything else, understanding the terminology that describes and distinguishesthese biomes is necessary when we come to consider key questions later in the book (especially in Chapters 20 and 21). 
Why are there more species in some communities than in others? Are some communities more stable in their composi-tion than others, and if so why? Do more productive environmentssupport more diverse communities? Or do more diverse com-munities make more productive use of the resources available to them?
•• ••(b)
Littonia
(Liliaceae)
Leaf-tip
Leaf Petiolule
Midrib
Leaflet
PetioleLeaflet
Stipule
PetioleMidribMutisia
(Asateraceae)
Clytostoma
(Bignoniaceae)
Asarina(Scrophulariaceae)Smilax(Smilacaceae)
Combretum(Combretaceae)Bignonia
(Bignoniaceae)Desmoncus
(Arecaceae)Clematis
(Ranunculaceae) Lathyrus(Fabaceae)
Figure 1.15 (continued ) (b) Structural
features that are homologous, i.e. derived
from modiﬁcations of a single organ, theleaf, shown by reference to an idealizedleaf in the center of the ﬁgure. (Courtesy
of Alan Bryant.)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 20THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 21
Tundra (see Plate 1.1, facing p. XX)
occurs around the Arctic Circle,
beyond the tree line. Small areas also
occur on sub-Antarctic islands in the southern hemisphere.‘Alpine’ tundra is found under similar conditions but at high 
altitude. The environment is characterized by the presence of permafrost – water permanently frozen in the soil – while liquidwater is present for only short periods of the year. The typicalﬂora includes lichens, mosses, grasses, sedges and dwarf trees.
Insects are extremely seasonal in their activity, and the native birdand mammal fauna is enriched by species that migrate fromwarmer latitudes in the summer. In the colder areas, grasses andsedges disappear, leaving nothing rooted in the permafrost.
Ultimately, vegetation that consists only of lichens and mossesgives way, in its turn, to the polar desert. The number of speciesof higher plants (i.e. excluding mosses and lichens) decreases
•• ••
Tasmanian wolf ( Thylacinus )Dog-like
carnivore
Cat-like
carnivore
Arboreal
glider
Fossorial
herbivore
Digging
ant feeder
Subterranean
insectivorePlacentals Marsupials
Native cat ( Dasyurus )
Flying phalanger
(Petaurus )
Wombat
(Vombatus )
Anteater
(Myrmecabius )
Marsupial mole
(Notoryctes )
Wolf
(Canis )
Ocelot ( Felis )
Flying squirrel
(Glaucomys )
Ground hog
(Marmota )
Anteater
(Myrmecophaga )
Common mole
(Talpa )
Figure 1.16 Parallel evolution of
marsupial and placental mammals. 
The pairs of species are similar in bothappearance and habit, and usually (but not always) in lifestyle.
tundraEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 2122 CHAPTER 1
from the Low Arctic (around 600 species in North America) 
to the High Arctic (north of 83°, e.g. around 100 species inGreenland and Ellesmere Island). In contrast, the ﬂora ofAntarctica contains only two native species of vascular plant andsome lichens and mosses that support a few small invertebrates.
The biological productivity and diversity of Antarctica are con-centrated at the coast and depend almost entirely on resourcesharvested from the sea.
Taiga or northern coniferous forest
(see Plate 1.2, facing p. XX) occupies abroad belt across North America and
Eurasia. Liquid water is unavailable for much of the winter, andplants and many of the animals have a conspicuous winter dor-mancy in which metabolism is very slow. Generally, the tree ﬂora
is very limited. In areas with less severe winters, the forests maybe dominated by pines ( Pinus species, which are all evergreens)
and deciduous trees such as larch ( Larix ), birch ( Betula ) or aspens
(Populus ), often as mixtures of species. Farther north, these
species give way to single-species forests of spruce ( Picea ) cover-
ing immense areas. The overriding environmental constraint innorthern spruce forests is the presence of permafrost, creating
drought except when the sun warms the surface. The root system of spruce can develop in the superﬁcial soil layer, fromwhich the trees derive all their water during the short growingseason.
Temperate forests (see Plate 1.3,
between pp. XX and XX) range from the
mixed conifer and broad-leaved forestsof much of North America and northern central Europe (wherethere may be 6 months of freezing temperatures), to the moistdripping forests of broad-leaved evergreen trees found at thebiome’s low latitude limits in, for example, Florida and NewZealand. In most temperate forests, however, there are periodsof the year when liquid water is in short supply, because poten-
tial evaporation exceeds the sum of precipitation and wateravailable from the soil. Deciduous trees, which dominate inmost temperate forests, lose their leaves in the fall and becomedormant. On the forest ﬂoor, diverse ﬂoras of perennial herbs oftenoccur, particularly those that grow quickly in the spring beforethe new tree foliage has developed. Temperate forests also 
•• ••Arctic tundra
Northern
coniferous forest
Temperate forestTropical rainforest
Tropical seasonal forest
Temperate grasslandTropical savanna
grassland and scrub
Desert
Mediterranean vegetation,
chaparralMountains
Figure 1.17 World distribution of the major biomes of vegetation. (After Audesirk & Audesirk, 1996.)
taigatemperate forestsEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 22THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 23
provide food resources for animals that are usually very seasonal
in their occurrence. Many of the birds of temperate forests aremigrants that return in spring but spend the remainder of the yearin warmer biomes.
Grassland occupies the drier parts
of temperate and tropical regions.
Temperate grassland has many local
names: the steppes of Asia, the prairies of North America, the pampas of South America and the veldt of South Africa. Tropicalgrassland or savanna (see Plate 1.4, between pp. XX and XX) isthe name applied to tropical vegetation ranging from pure grass-land to some trees with much grass. Almost all of these temper-ate and tropical grasslands experience seasonal drought, but therole of climate in determining their vegetation is almost completely
overridden by the effects of grazing animals that limit the speciespresent to those that can recover from frequent defoliation. Inthe savanna, ﬁre is also a common hazard in the dry season and,like grazing animals, it tips the balance in the vegetation againsttrees and towards grassland. None the less, there is typically a sea-sonal glut of food, alternating with shortage, and as a consequencethe larger grazing animals suffer extreme famine (and mortality)
in drier years. A seasonal abundance of seeds and insects supportslarge populations of migrating birds, but only a few species canﬁnd sufﬁciently reliable resources to be resident year-round.
Many of these natural grasslands have been cultivated and
replaced by arable annual ‘grasslands’ of wheat, oats, barley, 
rye and corn. Such annual grasses of temperate regions, together with rice in the tropics, provide the staple food of human popu-lations worldwide. At the drier margins of the biome, many ofthe grasslands are ‘managed’ for meat or milk production, some-times requiring a nomadic human lifestyle. The natural popula-tions of grazing animals have been driven back in favor of cattle,sheep and goats. Of all the biomes, this is the one most coveted,used and transformed by humans.
Chaparral or maquis occurs in
Mediterranean-type climates (mild,
wet winters and summer drought) in Europe, California andnorthwest Mexico, and in a few small areas in Australia, Chileand South Africa. Chaparral develops in regions with less rainfallthan temperate grasslands and is dominated mainly by a
•• ••40
–600 500040
–600 5000
(b) Savanna
40
–600Minimum temperature
(monthly average,°C)
Minimum temperature
(monthly average,°C)
5000(c) Temperate deciduous forest
(d) Northern coniferous forest (taiga) (e) Tundra
Total annual rainfall (mm)
(a) Tropical rainforest
40
–600 5000
40
–600 5000Minimum temperature
(monthly average,°C)Congo (Africa) Manaus (South America)
Atherton (Australia)
Figure 1.18 The variety of environmental
conditions experienced in terrestrial
environments can be described in terms of their annual rainfall and mean monthlyminimum temperatures. The range of
conditions experienced in: (a) tropicalrainforest, (b) savanna, (c) temperatedeciduous forest, (d) northern coniferousforest (taiga), and (e) tundra. (After Heal et al. , 1993; © UNESCO.)
grassland
chaparralEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 2324 CHAPTER 1
drought-resistant, hard-leaved scrub of low-growing woody
plants. Annual plants are also common in chaparral regions dur-ing the winter and early spring, when rainfall is more abundant.Chaparral is subject to periodic ﬁres; many plants produce seedsthat will only germinate after ﬁre while others can quickly
resprout because of food reserves in their ﬁre-resistant roots.
Deserts (see Plate 1.5, between pp. XX
and XX) are found in areas that experi-ence extreme water shortage: rainfall 
is usually less than about 25 cm year
−1, is usually very unpredictable
and is considerably less than potential evaporation. The desert
biome spans a very wide range of temperatures, from hotdeserts, such as the Sahara, to very cold deserts, such as the Gobiin Mongolia. In their most extreme form, the hot deserts are too
arid to bear any vegetation; they are as bare as the cold desertsof Antarctica. Where there is sufﬁcient rainfall to allow plants togrow in arid deserts, its timing is always unpredictable. Desertvegetation falls into two sharply contrasted patterns of behavior.Many species have an opportunistic lifestyle, stimulated into germination by the unpredictable rains. They grow fast andcomplete their life history by starting to set new seed after a fewweeks. These are the species that can occasionally make a desertbloom. A different pattern of behavior is to be long-lived with
sluggish physiological processes. Cacti and other succulents, andsmall shrubby species with small, thick and often hairy leaves, canclose their stomata (pores through which gas exchange takes place)and tolerate long periods of physiological inactivity. The relativepoverty of animal life in arid deserts reﬂects the low productiv-ity of the vegetation and the indigestibility of much of it.
Tropical rainforest (see Plate 1.6,
between pp. XX and XX) is the most productive of the earth’s biomes – a
result of the coincidence of high solar radiation received through-out the year and regular and reliable rainfall. The productivity is achieved, overwhelmingly, high in the dense forest canopy of evergreen foliage. It is dark at ground level except where fallen
trees create gaps. Often, many tree seedlings and saplings remainin a suppressed state from year to year and only leap into actionif a gap forms in the canopy above them. Apart from the trees,the vegetation is largely composed of plant forms that reach upinto the canopy vicariously; they either climb and then scramblein the tree canopy (vines and lianas, including many species of ﬁg)or grow as epiphytes, rooted on the damp upper branches. Mostspecies of both animals and plants in tropical rain forest are activethroughout the year, though the plants may ﬂower and ripen fruitin sequence. Dramatically high species richness is the norm fortropical rainforest, and communities rarely if ever become dom-inated by one or a few species. The diversity of rainforest treesprovides for a corresponding diversity of resources for herbivores,and so on up the food chain. Erwin (1982) estimated that there are18,000 species of beetle in 1 ha of Panamanian rainforest (comparedwith only 24,000 in the whole of the United States and Canada!).All of these biomes are terrestrial.
Aquatic ecologists could also come up
with a set of biomes, although the tra-dition has largely been a terrestrial one. We might distinguishsprings, rivers, ponds, lakes, estuaries, coastal zones, coral reefsand deep oceans, among other distinctive kinds of aquatic com-
munity. For present purposes, we recognize just two aquaticbiomes, marine and freshwater . The oceans cover about 71% of 
the earth’s surface and reach depths of more than 10,000 m.They extend from regions where precipitation exceeds evapora-tion to regions where the opposite is true. There are massive move-ments within this body of water that prevent major differencesin salt concentrations developing (the average concentration is about3%). Two main factors inﬂuence the biological activity of the
oceans. Photosynthetically active radiation is absorbed in its pas-sage through water, so photosynthesis is conﬁned to the surfaceregion. Mineral nutrients, especially nitrogen and phosphorus, are commonly so dilute that they limit the biomass that candevelop. Shallow waters (e.g. coastal regions and estuaries) tendto have high biological activity because they receive mineralinput from the land and less incident radiation is lost than in passage through deep waters. Intense biological activity alsooccurs where nutrient-rich waters from the ocean depths come
to the surface; this accounts for the concentration of many of theworld’s ﬁsheries in Arctic and Antarctic waters.
Freshwater biomes occur mainly on the route from land
drainage to the sea. The chemical composition of the watervaries enormously, depending on its source, its rate of ﬂow andthe inputs of organic matter from vegetation that is rooted in or around the aquatic environment. In water catchments wherethe rate of evaporation is high, salts leached from the land mayaccumulate and the concentrations may far exceed those presentin the oceans; brine lakes or even salt pans may be formed in whichlittle life is possible. Even in aquatic situations liquid water maybe unavailable, as is the case in the polar regions.
Differentiating between biomes allows only a very crude
recognition of the sorts of differences and similarities that occur
between communities of organisms. Within biomes there are bothsmall- and large-scale patterns of variation in the structure of com-munities and in the organisms that inhabit them. Moreover, aswe see next, what characterizes a biome is not necessarily the particular species that live there.
1.5.2 The ‘life form spectra’ of communities
We pointed out earlier the crucial importance of geographic 
isolation in allowing populations to diverge under selection. Thegeographic distributions of species, genera, families and evenhigher taxonomic categories of plants and animals often reﬂectthis geographic divergence. All species of lemurs, for example, are
found on the island of Madagascar and nowhere else. Similarly,
•• ••desert
tropical rainforestaquatic biomes?EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 24THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 25
230 species in the genus Eucalyptus (gum tree) occur naturally 
in Australia (and two or three in Indonesia and Malaysia). The
lemurs and the gum trees occur where they do because theyevolved there – not because these are the only places where they could survive and prosper. Indeed, many Eucalyptus species
grow with great success and spread rapidly when they have been
introduced to California or Kenya. A map of the natural worlddistribution of lemurs tells us quite a lot about the evolutionaryhistory of this group. But as far as its relationship with a biome isconcerned, the most we can say is that lemurs happen to be oneof the constituents of the tropical rainforest biome in Madagascar.
Similarly, particular biomes in Australia include certain mar-
supial mammals, while the same biomes in other parts of the world
are home to their placental counterparts. A map of biomes, then,
is not usually a map of the distribution of species. Instead, we recognize different biomes and different types of aquatic com-munity from the types of organisms that live in them. How can
we describe their similarities so that we can classify, compare andmap them? In addressing this question, the Danish biogeographerRaunkiaer developed, in 1934, his idea of ‘life forms’, a deep insightinto the ecological signiﬁcance of plant forms (Figure 1.19). Hethen used the spectrum of life forms present in different types ofvegetation as a means of describing their ecological character.
Plants grow by developing new
shoots from the buds that lie at theapices (tips) of existing shoots and in theleaf axils. Within the buds, the meris-
tematic cells are the most sensitive part of the whole shoot – the
‘Achilles’ heel’ of plants. Raunkiaer argued that the ways inwhich these buds are protected in different plants are powerfulindicators of the hazards in their environments and may be usedto deﬁne the different plant forms (Figure 1.19). Thus, treesexpose their buds high in the air, fully exposed to the wind, cold and drought; Raunkiaer called them phanerophytes (Greek
phanero , ‘visible’; phyte , ‘plant’). By contrast, many perennial
herbs form cushions or tussocks in which buds are borne aboveground but are protected from drought and cold in the dense massof old leaves and shoots ( chamaephytes : ‘on the ground plants’).
Buds are even better protected when they are formed at or inthe soil surface ( hemicryptophytes : ‘half hidden plants’) or on
buried dormant storage organs (bulbs, corms and rhizomes – cryptophytes : ‘hidden plants’; or geophytes : ‘earth plants’). These allow
the plants to make rapid growth and to ﬂower before they dieback to a dormant state. A ﬁnal major category consists ofannual plants that depend wholly on dormant seeds to carry theirpopulations through seasons of drought and cold ( therophytes : ‘sum-
mer plants’). Therophytes are the plants of deserts (they makeup nearly 50% of the ﬂora of Death Valley, USA), sand dunes andrepeatedly disturbed habitats. They also include the annualweeds of arable lands, gardens and urban wastelands.
But there is, of course, no vegetation that consists entirely of
one growth form. All vegetation contains a mixture, a spectrum,of Raunkiaer’s life forms. The composition of the spectrum in any
particular habitat is as good a shorthand description of its vegeta-tion as ecologists have yet managed to devise. Raunkiaer comparedthese with a ‘global spectrum’ obtained by sampling from a com-pendium of all species known and described in his time (the Index
Kewensis ), biased by the fact that the tropics were, and still are,
relatively unexplored. Thus, for example, we recognize a chaparral
type of vegetation when we see it in Chile, Australia, Californiaor Crete because the life form spectrums are similar. Their detailedtaxonomies would only emphasize how different they are.
Faunas are bound to be closely tied to ﬂoras – if only because
most herbivores are choosy about their diet. Terrestrial carnivoresrange more widely than their herbivore prey, but the distributionof herbivores still gives the carnivores a broad vegetational alle-
giance. Plant scientists have tended to be keener on classifying ﬂorasthan animal scientists on classifying faunas, but one interestingattempt to classify faunas compared the mammals of forests inMalaya, Panama, Australia and Zaire (Andrews et al. , 1979). They
were classiﬁed into carnivores, herbivores, insectivores and mixedfeeders, and these categories were subdivided into those that wereaerial (mainly bats and ﬂying foxes), arboreal (tree dwellers),scansorial (climbers) or small ground mammals (Figure 1.20). Thecomparison reveals some strong contrasts and similarities. Forexample, the ecological diversity spectra for the Australian andMalayan forests were very similar despite the fact that their faunas are taxonomically very distinct – the Australian mammalsare marsupials and the Malaysian mammals are placentals.
1.6 The diversity of matches within communities
Although a particular type of organism is often characteristic of
a particular ecological situation, it will almost inevitably be onlypart of a diverse community of species. A satisfactory account,therefore, must do more than identify the similarities betweenorganisms that allow them to live in the same environment – 
it must also try to explain why species that live in the same environment are often profoundly different. To some extent, this‘explanation’ of diversity is a trivial exercise. It comes as no sur-prise that a plant utilizing sunlight, a fungus living on the plant,a herbivore eating the plant and a parasitic worm living in theherbivore should all coexist in the same community. On the other hand, most communities also contain a variety of differentspecies that are all constructed in a fairly similar way and all living (at least superﬁcially) a fairly similar life. There are several
elements in an explanation of this diversity.
1.6.1 Environments are heterogeneous
There are no homogeneous environments in nature. Even a 
continuously stirred culture of microorganisms is heterogeneous
•• ••Raunkiaer’s
classiﬁcationEIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 2526 CHAPTER 1
because it has a boundary – the walls of the culture vessel – 
and cultured microorganisms often subdivide into two forms: one that sticks to the walls and the other that remains free in themedium.
The extent to which an environment is heterogeneous depends
on the scale of the organism that senses it. To a mustard seed, a
grain of soil is a mountain; and to a caterpillar, a single leaf mayrepresent a lifetime’s diet. A seed lying in the shadow of a leaf
may be inhibited in its germination while a seed lying outside thatshadow germinates freely. What appears to the human observeras a homogeneous environment may, to an organism within it,be a mosaic of the intolerable and the adequate.
There may also be gradients in space (e.g. altitude) or gradi-
ents in time, and the latter, in their turn, may be rhythmic (like
•• ••Phanerophytes CryptophytesAnnuals
(therophytes) Hemicryptophytes Chamaephytesor
Mediterranean Desert
Phanerophyte ChamaephyteHemicryptophyteCryptophyte TherophytePhanerophyte ChamaephyteHemicryptophyteCryptophyte Therophyte80
6040
20
0Percent of total floraTemperate Arctic80
6040
20
0Percent of total floraTropical
Phanerophyte ChamaephyteHemicryptophyteCryptophyte TherophytePhanerophyte ChamaephyteHemicryptophyteCryptophyte TherophytePhanerophyte ChamaephyteHemicryptophyteCryptophyte Therophyte
Figure 1.19 The drawings above depict the variety of plant forms distinguished by Raunkiaer on the basis of where they bear their 
buds (shown in color). Below are life form spectrums for ﬁve different biomes. The colored bars show the percentage of the tota l ﬂora 
that is composed of species with each of the ﬁve different life forms. The gray bars are the proportions of the various life fo rms in 
the world ﬂora for comparison. (From Crawley, 1986.)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 26THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 27
daily and seasonal cycles), directional (like the accumulation of a
pollutant in a lake) or erratic (like ﬁres, hailstorms and typhoons).
Heterogeneity crops up again and again in later chapters – in
part because of the challenges it poses to organisms in movingfrom patch to patch (Chapter 6), in part because of the variety of
opportunities it provides for different species (Chapters 8 and 19),and in part because heterogeneity can alter communities byinterrupting what would otherwise be a steady march to anequilibrium state (Chapters 10 and 19).
1.6.2 Pairs of species
As we have already noted, the existence of one type of organism
in an area immediately diversiﬁes it for others. Over its lifetime,an organism may increase the diversity of its environment by con-tributing dung, urine, dead leaves and ultimately its dead body.During its life, its body may serve as a place in which other species
ﬁnd homes. Indeed, some of the most strongly developed matchesbetween organisms and their environment are those in which onespecies has developed a dependence upon another. This is the casein many relationships between consumers and their foods. Wholesyndromes of form, behavior and metabolism constrain the animal within its narrow food niche, and deny it access to whatmight otherwise appear suitable alternative foods. Similar tightmatches are characteristic of the relationships between parasitesand their hosts. The various interactions in which one species isconsumed by another are the subject matter of Chapters 9–12.
Where two species have evolved a mutual dependence, the
ﬁt may be even tighter. We examine such ‘mutualisms’ in detailin Chapter 13. The association of nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria with theroots of leguminous plants, and the often extremely precise rela-tionships between insect pollinators and their ﬂowers, are two good
examples.
When a population has been exposed to variations in the phys-
ical factors of the environment, for example a short growing season or a high risk of frost or drought, a once-and-for-all toler-ance may ultimately evolve. The physical factor cannot itself change or evolve as a result of the evolution of the organisms.By contrast, when members of two species interact, the changein each produces alterations in the life of the other, and each may
generate selective forces that direct the evolution of the other.In such a coevolutionary process the interaction between twospecies may continually escalate. What we then see in nature maybe pairs of species that have driven each other into ever narrowingruts of specialization – an ever closer match.
•• ••
Number of species (%)
C I0HF203040
M(a)
10
C I0HF203040
M(b)
10Number of species (%)
C I0HF203040
M(c)
10
C I0HF203040
M(d)
10Figure 1.20 The percentages of forest
mammals in various locomotory and
feeding habitat categories in communitiesin: (a) Malaya, all forested areas (161species), (b) Panama dry forest (70 species),
(c) Australia, Cape York forest (50 species),and (d) Zaire, Irangi forest (96 species). C, carnivores; HF, herbivores andfructivores; I, insectivores; M, mixedfeeders; ( ) aerial; ( ) arboreal;( ) scansorial; ( ) small groundmammals. (After Andrews et al. , 1979.)EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 2728 CHAPTER 1
1.6.3 Coexistence of similar species
While it is no surprise that species with rather different roles coex-
ist within the same community, it is also generally the case thatcommunities support a variety of species performing apparentlyrather similar roles. The Antarctic seals are an example. It is thoughtthat the ancestral seals evolved in the northern hemisphere,
where they are present as Miocene fossils, but one group of sealsmoved south into warmer waters and probably colonized theAntarctic in the Late Miocene or Early Pliocene (about 5 millionyears ago). When they entered the Antarctic, the SouthernOcean was probably rich in food and free from major predators,as it is today. It was within this environment that the group appearsto have undergone radiative evolution (Figure 1.21). For ex-ample, the Weddell seal feeds primarily on ﬁsh and has unspe-cialized dentition; the crab-eater seal feeds almost exclusively on
krill and its teeth are suited to ﬁltering these from the sea water;the Ross seal has small, sharp teeth and feeds mainly on pelagicsquid; and the leopard seal has large, cusped, grasping teeth and
feeds on a wide variety of foods, including other seals and, in someseasons, penguins.
Do these species compete with one another? Do competing
species need to be different if they are to coexist? If so, how dif-ferent do they need to be: is there some limit to their similarity?Do species like the seals interact with one another at the present
time, or has evolution in the past led to the absence of such 
interactions in contemporary communities? We return to thesequestions about coexisting, similar species in Chapter 8.
Even at this stage, though, we may note that coexisting
species, even when apparently very similar, commonly differ insubtle ways – not simply in their morphology or physiology butalso in their responses to their environment and the role they playwithin the community of which they are part. The ‘ecological
niches’ of such species are said to be differentiated from one another.The concept of the ecological niche is itself explained in the nexttwo chapters.
•• ••
(c)(a)
(d)(b)
Figure 1.21 Antarctic seals, similar species that coexist: (a) the Weddell seal, Leptonychotes weddellii (© Imageshop – zefa visual media uk
ltd/Alamy), (b) the crab-eater seal Lobodon carcinophagus (© Bryan & Cherry Alexander Photography/Alamy), (c) the Ross seal, Omatophoca
rossii (© Chris Sattlberger/Science Photo Library), and (d) the leopard seal, Hydrurga leptonyx (© Kevin Schafer/Alamy).EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 28THE EVOLUTIONARY BACKDROP 29
Summary
‘Nothing in biology makes sense, except in the light of evolution’.
We try in this chapter to illustrate the processes by which the properties of different sorts of species make their life possible inparticular environments.
We explain what is meant by evolutionary adaptation and by
the theory of evolution by natural selection, an ecological theory
ﬁrst elaborated by Charles Darwin in 1859. Through naturalselection, organisms come to match their environments by being‘the ﬁttest available’ or ‘the ﬁttest yet’: they are not ‘the best imaginable’.
Adaptive variation within species can occur at a range of 
levels: all represent a balance between local adaptation andhybridization. Ecotypes are genetically determined variantsbetween populations within a species that reﬂect local matches
between the organisms and their environments. Genetic poly-morphism is the occurrence together in the same habitat of twoor more distinct forms. Dramatic examples of local specializationhave been driven by manmade ecological forces, especially thoseof environmental pollution.We describe the process of speciation by which two or more
new species are formed from one original species and explain what
we mean by a ‘species’, especially a biospecies. Islands providearguably the most favorable environment for populations todiverge into distinct species.
Species live where they do for reasons that are often accidents
of history. We illustrate this by examining island patterns, the move-
ments of land masses over geological time, climatic changes
especially during the Pleistocene ice ages (and we compare thiswith predicted changes consequent on current global warming)and the concepts of convergent and parallel evolution.
The various terrestrial biomes of the earth are reviewed and
their aquatic equivalents touched on brieﬂy. Raunkiaer’s conceptof life form spectra, in particular, emphasizes that ecologicalcommunities may be fundamentally very similar even when 
taxonomically quite distinct.
All communities comprise a diversity of species: a diversity of
matches to the local environment. Environmental heterogeneity,interactions between predators and prey, parasites and hosts andmutualists, and the coexistence of similar species all contributeto this.
•• ••EIPC01  10/24/05  1:42 PM  Page 29••2.1 Introduction
In order to understand the distribution and abundance of a
species we need to know its history (Chapter 1), the resources itrequires (Chapter 3), the individuals’ rates of birth, death and migra-tion (Chapters 4 and 6), their interactions with their own and otherspecies (Chapters 5 and 8–13) and the effects of environmental
conditions. This chapter deals with the limits placed on organ-isms by environmental conditions.
A condition is as an abiotic envir-
onmental factor that inﬂuences the func-tioning of living organisms. Examplesinclude temperature, relative humidity,pH, salinity and the concentration of 
pollutants. A condition may be modiﬁed by the presence ofother organisms. For example, temperature, humidity and soil pH
may be altered under a forest canopy. But unlike resources, con-ditions are not consumed or used up by organisms.For some conditions we can recognize an optimum concen-
tration or level at which an organism performs best, with its activ-
ity tailing off at both lower and higher levels (Figure 2.1a). Butwe need to deﬁne what we mean by ‘performs best’. From anevolutionary point of view, ‘optimal’ conditions are those underwhich individuals leave most descendants (are ﬁttest), but theseare often impossible to determine in practice because measures
of ﬁtness should be made over several generations. Instead, we
more often measure the effect of conditions on some key prop-erty like the activity of an enzyme, the respiration rate of a tissue,the growth rate of individuals or their rate of reproduction.However, the effect of variation in conditions on these variousproperties will often not be the same; organisms can usually survive over a wider range of conditions than permit them to grow or reproduce (Figure 2.1a).
The precise shape of a species’ response will vary from con-
dition to condition. The generalized form of response, shown in
Figure 2.1a, is appropriate for conditions like temperature and pH
conditions may be
altered – but notconsumed
Performance of species
Intensity of conditionReproduction
Individual
growth
Individual
survival
RR
G G
S S(a) (b)
R
G
S(c)
R
G
S
Figure 2.1 Response curves illustrating the effects of a range of environmental conditions on individual survival (S), growth (G) and
reproduction (R). (a) Extreme conditions are lethal; less extreme conditions prevent growth; only optimal conditions allow repr oduction.
(b) The condition is lethal only at high intensities; the reproduction–growth–survival sequence still applies. (c) Similar to ( b), but the
condition is required by organisms, as a resource, at low concentrations.
Chapter 2
Conditions
EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 30CONDITIONS 31
in which there is a continuum from an adverse or lethal level (e.g.
freezing or very acid conditions), through favorable levels of thecondition to a further adverse or lethal level (heat damage or veryalkaline conditions). There are, though, many environmental con-ditions for which Figure 2.1b is a more appropriate response curve:
for instance, most toxins, radioactive emissions and chemicalpollutants, where a low-level intensity or concentration of the condition has no detectable effect, but an increase begins tocause damage and a further increase may be lethal. There is alsoa different form of response to conditions that are toxic at highlevels but essential for growth at low levels (Figure 2.1c). This isthe case for sodium chloride – an essential resource for animalsbut lethal at high concentrations – and for the many elements thatare essential micronutrients in the growth of plants and animals
(e.g. copper, zinc and manganese), but that can become lethal at the higher concentrations sometimes caused by industrial pollution.
In this chapter, we consider responses to temperature in
much more detail than other conditions, because it is the singlemost important condition that affects the lives of organisms, andmany of the generalizations that we make have widespread relevance. We move on to consider a range of other conditions,before returning, full circle, to temperature because of the effectsof other conditions, notably pollutants, on global warming. Webegin, though, by explaining the framework within which eachof these conditions should be understood here: the ecological niche.
2.2 Ecological niches
The term ecological niche is frequently misunderstood and misused.
It is often used loosely to describe the sort of place in which an
organism lives, as in the sentence: ‘Woodlands are the niche ofwoodpeckers’. Strictly, however, where an organism lives is itshabitat . A niche is not a place but an idea: a summary of the organ-
ism’s tolerances and requirements. The habitat of a gut micro-
organism would be an animal’s alimentary canal; the habitat of anaphid might be a garden; and the habitat of a ﬁsh could be a wholelake. Each habitat, however, provides many different niches:many other organisms also live in the gut, the garden or the lake– and with quite different lifestyles. The word niche began to gain
its present scientiﬁc meaning when Elton wrote in 1933 that theniche of an organism is its mode of life ‘in the sense that we speakof trades or jobs or professions in a human community’. The niche
of an organism started to be used to describe how, rather thanjust where, an organism lives.
The modern concept of the niche
was proposed by Hutchinson in 1957 toaddress the ways in which tolerances and
requirements interact to deﬁne the conditions (this chapter) andresources (Chapter 3) needed by an individual or a species in orderto practice its way of life. Temperature, for instance, limits the
growth and reproduction of all organisms, but different organ-isms tolerate different ranges of temperature. This range is onedimension of an organism’s ecological niche. Figure 2.2a shows how
species of plants vary in this dimension of their niche: how theyvary in the range of temperatures at which they can survive. But
there are many such dimensions of a species’ niche – its toler-ance of various other conditions (relative humidity, pH, wind speed,water ﬂow and so on) and its need for various resources. Clearlythe real niche of a species must be multi dimensional.
It is easy to visualize the early
stages of building such a multidimen-sional niche. Figure 2.2b illustrates theway in which two niche dimensions(temperature and salinity) together deﬁne a two-dimensionalarea that is part of the niche of a sand shrimp. Three dimensions,such as temperature, pH and the availability of a particular food,may deﬁne a three-dimensional niche volume (Figure 2.2c). In fact,we consider a niche to be an n-dimensional hypervolume , where n
is the number of dimensions that make up the niche. It is hard
to imagine (and impossible to draw) this more realistic picture.None the less, the simpliﬁed three-dimensional version capturesthe idea of the ecological niche of a species. It is deﬁned by theboundaries that limit where it can live, grow and reproduce, andit is very clearly a concept rather than a place. The concept hasbecome a cornerstone of ecological thought.
Provided that a location is characterized by conditions within
acceptable limits for a given species, and provided also that it con-
tains all the necessary resources, then the species can, potentially,occur and persist there. Whether or not it does so depends ontwo further factors. First, it must be able to reach the location,and this depends in turn on its powers of colonization and theremoteness of the site. Second, its occurrence may be precludedby the action of individuals of other species that compete with itor prey on it.
Usually, a species has a larger eco-
logical niche in the absence of com-
petitors and predators than it has intheir presence. In other words, there are certain combinations ofconditions and resources that can allow a species to maintain aviable population, but only if it is not being adversely affected by enemies. This led Hutchinson to distinguish between the fun-
damental and the realized niche. The former describes the overall
potentialities of a species; the latter describes the more limitedspectrum of conditions and resources that allow it to persist, even
in the presence of competitors and predators. Fundamental andrealized niches will receive more attention in Chapter 8, whenwe look at interspeciﬁc competition.
The remainder of this chapter looks at some of the most 
important condition dimensions of species’ niches, starting withtemperature; the following chapter examines resources, which addfurther dimensions of their own.
••niche dimensionsthe n-dimensional
hypervolume
fundamental and
realized nichesEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 3132 CHAPTER 2
2.3 Responses of individuals to temperature
2.3.1 What do we mean by ‘extreme’?
It seems natural to describe certain environmental conditions 
as ‘extreme’, ‘harsh’, ‘benign’ or ‘stressful’. It may seem obviouswhen conditions are ‘extreme’: the midday heat of a desert, thecold of an Antarctic winter, the salinity of the Great Salt Lake.But this only means that these conditions are extreme for us , 
given our particular physiological characteristics and tolerances.To a cactus there is nothing extreme about the desert condi-tions in which cacti have evolved; nor are the icy fastnesses ofAntarctica an extreme environment for penguins (Wharton,2002). It is too easy and dangerous for the ecologist to assumethat all other organisms sense the environment in the way we do. Rather, the ecologist should try to gain a worm’s-eye or plant’s-eye view of the environment: to see the world as others see it. Emotive words like harsh and benign, even relat-ivities such as hot and cold, should be used by ecologists only 
with care.
•• ••Ranunculus glacialis
Oxyria digynaGeum reptans
Pinus cembra
Picea abiesBetula pendulaLarix deciduaPicea abiesLarix deciduaLeucojum vernumBetula pendulaFagus sylvatica
Taxus baccataAbies albaPrunus laurocerasusQuercus ilexOlea europaeaQuercus pubescensCitrus limonum
Temperature (°C)25
2015
10
5
Salinity (%)0 1 02 03 04 0 5 1 52 53 54 52600
250025001900190019001900
900
900600
600600550530250240
240240
80
(m)(a) (b) Temperature ( °C)
5 1 01 52 02 53 0
100% mortality
50% mortality
Zero mortality
TemperaturepH(c)
Food available
Figure 2.2 (a) A niche in one dimension. The range of temperatures at which a variety of plant species from the European Alps can
achieve net photosynthesis of low intensities of radiation (70 W m−2). (After Pisek et al. , 1973.) (b) A niche in two dimensions for the 
sand shrimp ( Crangon septemspinosa ) showing the fate of egg-bearing females in aerated water at a range of temperatures and salinities.
(After Haefner, 1970.) (c) A diagrammatic niche in three dimensions for an aquatic organism showing a volume deﬁned by the
temperature, pH and availability of food.EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 32CONDITIONS 33
2.3.2 Metabolism, growth, development and size
Individuals respond to temperature
essentially in the manner shown inFigure 2.1a: impaired function andultimately death at the upper andlower extremes (discussed in Sec-
tions 2.3.4 and 2.3.6), with a functional range between the
extremes, within which there is an optimum. This is accountedfor, in part, simply by changes in metabolic effectiveness. For each10°C rise in temperature, for example, the rate of biological enzy-matic processes often roughly doubles, and thus appears as an exponential curve on a plot of rate against temperature (Figure 2.3).The increase is brought about because high temperature increasesthe speed of molecular movement and speeds up chemical reac-tions. The factor by which a reaction changes over a 10°C range
is referred to as a Q
10: a rough doubling means that Q10≈ 2.
For an ecologist, however, effects on
individual chemical reactions are likely
to be less important than effects on ratesof growth (increases in mass), on rates
of development (progression throughlifecycle stages) and on ﬁnal body size,
since, as we shall discuss much more fully in Chapter 4, these tendto drive the core ecological activities of survival, reproduction and
movement. And when we plot rates of growth and developmentof whole organisms against temperature, there is quite com-monly an extended range over which there are, at most, only slightdeviations from linearity (Figure 2.4).
When the relationship between
growth or development iseffectively 
linear, the temperatures experienced by an organism can besummarized in a single very useful value, the number of ‘day-degrees’. For instance, Figure 2.4c shows that at 15°C (5.1°C abovea development threshold of 9.9°C) the predatory mite, Amblyseius
californicus , took 24.22 days to develop (i.e. the proportion of its
total development achieved each day was 0.041 ( =1/24.22)), but
it took only 8.18 days to develop at 25°C (15.1°C above the samethreshold). At both temperatures, therefore, development required123.5 day-degrees (or, more properly, ‘day-degrees above thresh-old’), i.e. 24.22 ×5.1=123.5, and 8.18 ×15.1=123.5. This is also
the requirement for development in the mite at other temper-atures within the nonlethal range. Such organisms cannot be said
to require a certain length of time for development. What theyrequire is a combination of time and temperature, often referredto as ‘physiological time’.
Together, the rates of growth and
development determine the ﬁnal size ofan organism. For instance, for a givenrate of growth, a faster rate of devel-opment will lead to smaller ﬁnal size. Hence, if the responses ofgrowth and development to variations in temperature are not thesame, temperature will also affect ﬁnal size. In fact, developmentusually increases more rapidly with temperature than does growth,such that, for a very wide range of organisms, ﬁnal size tends todecrease with rearing temperature: the ‘temperature–size rule’ (see
Atkinson et al. , 2003). An example for single-celled protists (72 data
sets from marine, brackish and freshwater habitats) is shown in Figure 2.5: for each 1°C increase in temperature, ﬁnal cell volume decreased by roughly 2.5%.
These effects of temperature on growth, development and size
may be of practical rather than simply scientiﬁc importance.Increasingly, ecologists are called upon to predict. We may wishto know what the consequences would be, say, of a 2°C rise intemperature resulting from global warming (see Section 2.9.2).
Or we may wish to understand the role of temperature in sea-sonal, interannual and geographic variations in the productivityof, for example, marine ecosystems (Blackford et al. , 2004). We
cannot afford to assume exponential relationships with temper-ature if they are really linear, nor to ignore the effects of changesin organism size on their role in ecological communities.
Motivated, perhaps, by this need to
be able to extrapolate from the known
to the unknown, and also simply by awish to discover fundamental organiz-ing principles governing the world
•• ••exponential effects 
of temperature onmetabolic reactions
effectively lineareffects on rates of growth anddevelopmentTemperature ( °C)5 1 01 52 02 53 0Oxygen consumption (µl O2g–1h–1)600
500400
300
200
100
Figure 2.3 The rate of oxygen consumption of the Colorado
beetle ( Leptinotarsa decemineata ), which doubles for every 10°C 
rise in temperature up to 20°C, but increases less fast at higher
temperatures. (After Marzusch, 1952.)day-degree concept
temperature–size
rule
‘universaltemperaturedependence’?EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 33••34 CHAPTER 2
around us, there have been attempts to uncover universal rules of
temperature dependence, for metabolism itself and for develop-ment rates, linking all organisms by scaling such dependences with aspects of body size (Gillooly et al. , 2001, 2002). Others have
suggested that such generalizations may be oversimpliﬁed, stress-
ing for example that characteristics of whole organisms, like
growth and development rates, are determined not only by thetemperature dependence of individual chemical reactions, but alsoby those of the availability of resources, their rate of diffusion fromthe environment to metabolizing tissues, and so on (Rombough,2003; Clarke, 2004). It may be that there is room for coexistencebetween broad-sweep generalizations at the grand scale and themore complex relationships at the level of individual species thatthese generalizations subsume.
2.3.3 Ectotherms and endotherms
Many organisms have a body temperature that differs little, if 
at all, from their environment. A parasitic worm in the gut of a mammal, a fungal mycelium in the soil and a sponge in the sea acquire the temperature of the medium in which they live.Terrestrial organisms, exposed to the sun and the air, are differ-
ent because they may acquire heat directly by absorbing solar radi-ation or be cooled by the latent heat of evaporation of water (typical
••Growth rate (µm day –1)
–0.2
41.0
Temperature ( °C)0.8
24 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22(a)
0.6
0.40.2
0.0Developmental rate
050.25
Temperature ( °C)0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
35 10 20 30(c)
15 25y = 0.0081 x – 0.05
R2 = 0.6838Developmental rate
0.08180.2
Temperature ( °C)0.18
0.16
28 20 22 24 26(b)
0.14
0.12
0.1y = 0.0124 x – 0.1384
R2 = 0.9753y = 0.072 x – 0.32
R2 = 0.64
Figure 2.4 Effectively linear relationships between rates of
growth and development and temperature. (a) Growth of the
protist Strombidinopsis multiauris . (After Montagnes et al. , 2003.) 
(b) Egg development in the beetle Oulema duftschmidi . (After
Severini et al. , 2003.) (c) Egg to adult development in the mite
Amblyseius californicus . (After Hart et al. , 2002.) The vertical scales
in (b) and (c) represent the proportion of total development
achieved in 1 day at the temperature concerned.
(Difference from V 15)/V15
–0.8–201.2
Temperature ( °C – 15)20 –10 0 100.8
0.4
0
–0.4
Figure 2.5 The temperature–size rule (ﬁnal size decreases 
with increasing temperature) illustrated in protists (65 data sets
combined). The horizontal scale measures temperature as adeviation from 15°C. The vertical scale measures standardizedsize: the difference between the cell volume observed and the cell
volume at 15°C, divided by cell volume at 15°C. The slope of themean regression line, which must pass through the point (0,0), was−0.025 (SE, 0.004); the cell volume decreased by 2.5% for every
1°C rise in rearing temperature. (After Atkinson et al. , 2003.)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 34••CONDITIONS 35
pathways of heat exchange are shown in Figure 2.6). Various ﬁxed
properties may ensure that body temperatures are higher (or lower)than the ambient temperatures. For example, the reﬂective,shiny or silvery leaves of many desert plants reﬂect radiation thatmight otherwise heat the leaves. Organisms that can move have
further control over their body temperature because they can seekout warmer or cooler environments, as when a lizard chooses towarm itself by basking on a hot sunlit rock or escapes from theheat by ﬁnding shade.
Amongst insects there are examples of body temperatures raised
by controlled muscular work, as when bumblebees raise their bodytemperature by shivering their ﬂight muscles. Social insects suchas bees and termites may combine to control the temperature oftheir colonies and regulate them with remarkable thermostatic
precision. Even some plants (e.g. Philodendron ) use metabolic heat
to maintain a relatively constant temperature in their ﬂowers; and, of course, birds and mammals use metabolic heat almost all of the time to maintain an almost perfectly constant body temperature.
An important distinction, therefore, is between endotherms
that regulate their temperature by the production of heat withintheir own bodies, and ectotherms that rely on external sources of
heat. But this distinction is not entirely clear cut. As we have noted,apart from birds and mammals, there are also other taxa that useheat generated in their own bodies to regulate body temperature,but only for limited periods; and there are some birds and mammals that relax or suspend their endothermic abilities at the
most extreme temperatures. In particular, many endothermicanimals escape from some of the costs of endothermy by 
hibernating during the coldest seasons:at these times they behave almost likeectotherms.
Birds and mammals usually maintain
a constant body temperature between35 and 40°C, and they therefore tend to lose heat in most envir-
onments; but this loss is moderated by insulation in the form offur, feathers and fat, and by controlling blood ﬂow near the skinsurface. When it is necessary to increase the rate of heat loss, thistoo can be achieved by the control of surface blood ﬂow and 
by a number of other mechanisms shared with ectotherms likepanting and the simple choice of an appropriate habitat. Together,all these mechanisms and properties give endotherms a powerful(but not perfect) capability for regulating their body temperature,and the beneﬁt they obtain from this is a constancy of near-optimalperformance. But the price they pay is a large expenditure of energy(Figure 2.7), and thus a correspondingly large requirement for foodto provide that energy. Over a certain temperature range (the thermoneutral zone) an endotherm consumes energy at a basal
rate. But at environmental temperatures further and further aboveor below that zone, the endotherm consumes more and moreenergy in maintaining a constant body temperature. Even in thethermoneutral zone, though, an endotherm typically consumesenergy many times more rapidly than an ectotherm of compar-able size.
The responses of endotherms and ectotherms to changing tem-
peratures, then, are not so different as they may at ﬁrst appearto be. Both are at risk of being killed by even short exposures tovery low temperatures and by more prolonged exposure tomoderately low temperatures. Both have an optimal environmentaltemperature and upper and lower lethal limits. There are also coststo both when they live at temperatures that are not optimal. For
the ectotherm these may be slower growth and reproduction, slowmovement, failure to escape predators and a sluggish rate of searchfor food. But for the endotherm, the maintenance of body tem-perature costs energy that might have been used to catch moreprey, produce and nurture more offspring or escape more pre-dators. There are also costs of insulation (e.g. blubber in whales, furin mammals) and even costs of changing the insulation between
••
Reradiation
Evaporative
exchange
Radiation
exchangeRadiation
from atomsphere Reflectedsunlight
Scatteredradiation
Direct radiation
Convectiveexchange
Reflected
radiationMetabolismWind
Conductionexchange
Figure 2.6 Schematic diagram of the
avenues of heat exchange between an
ectotherm and a variety of physical aspectsof its environment. (After Tracy, 1976;from Hainsworth, 1981.)
endotherms:
temperature regulation– but at a costEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 3536 CHAPTER 2
seasons. Temperatures only a few degrees higher than the
metabolic optimum are liable to be lethal to endotherms as wellas ectotherms (see Section 2.3.6).
It is tempting to think of ecto-
therms as ‘primitive’ and endotherms as
having gained ‘advanced’ control overtheir environment, but it is difﬁcult tojustify this view. Most environments
on earth are inhabited by mixed communities of endothermic andectothermic animals. This includes some of the hottest – e.g. desertrodents and lizards – and some of the coldest – penguins and whalestogether with ﬁsh and krill at the edge of the Antarctic ice sheet.Rather, the contrast, crudely, is between the high cost–high beneﬁtstrategy of endotherms and the low cost–low beneﬁt strategy of
ectotherms. But their coexistence tells us that both strategies, intheir own ways, can ‘work’.2.3.4 Life at low temperatures
The greater part of our planet is below 5°C: ‘cold is the ﬁercest
and most widespread enemy of life on earth’ (Franks et al. , 1990).
More than 70% of the planet is covered with seawater: mostlydeep ocean with a remarkably constant temperature of about 2°C.If we include the polar ice caps, more than 80% of earth’s bio-
sphere is permanently cold.
By deﬁnition, all temperatures below
the optimum are harmful, but there isusually a wide range of such temperatures that cause no physi-cal damage and over which any effects are fully reversible. Thereare, however, two quite distinct types of damage at low temper-atures that can be lethal, either to tissues or to whole organisms:chilling and freezing. Many organisms are damaged by exposure totemperatures that are low but above freezing point – so-called
•• ••Oxygen consumption
40005
20
Ambient temperature ( °C)(b)
4
3
2
1
btHeat production (cal g–1h–1)
40 30 100040
20
Environmental temperature ( °C)(a)
35
30
25
20
15
10
5bca45
40
3530
Body temperature (°C)
10 30
Figure 2.7 (a) Thermostatic heat production by an endotherm is constant in the thermoneutral zone, i.e. between b, the lower 
critical temperature, and c, the upper critical temperature. Heat production rises, but body temperature remains constant, as
environmental temperature declines below b, until heat production reaches a maximum possible rate at a low environmental 
temperature. Below a, heat production and body temperature both fall. Above c, metabolic rate, heat production and body 
temperature all rise. Hence, body temperature is constant at environmental temperatures between aand c. (After Hainsworth, 1981.) 
(b) The effect of environmental temperature on the metabolic rate (rate of oxygen consumption) of the eastern chipmunk 
(Tamias striatus ). bt, body temperature. Note that at temperatures between 0 and 30°C oxygen consumption decreases 
approximately linearly as the temperature increases. Above 30°C a further increase in temperature has little effect until near the animal’s body temperature when oxygen consumption increases again. (After Neumann, 1967; Nedgergaard & Cannon, 1990.)
ectotherms and
endotherms coexist:both strategies ‘work’
chilling injuryEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 36CONDITIONS 37
‘chilling injury’. The fruits of the banana blacken and rot after 
exposure to chilling temperatures and many tropical rainforestspecies are sensitive to chilling. The nature of the injury isobscure, although it seems to be associated with the breakdownof membrane permeability and the leakage of speciﬁc ions such
as calcium (Minorsky, 1985).
Temperatures below 0°C can have lethal physical and chem-
ical consequences even though ice may not be formed. Water may‘supercool’ to temperatures at least as low as −40°C, remaining
in an unstable liquid form in which its physical properties changein ways that are bound to be biologically signiﬁcant: its viscosityincreases, its diffusion rate decreases and its degree of ionizationof water decreases. In fact, ice seldom forms in an organism untilthe temperature has fallen several degrees below 0°C. Body
ﬂuids remain in a supercooled state until ice forms suddenly aroundparticles that act as nuclei. The concentration of solutes in theremaining liquid phase rises as a consequence. It is very rare forice to form within cells and it is then inevitably lethal, but thefreezing of extracellular water is one of the factors that preventsice forming within the cells themselves (Wharton, 2002), sincewater is withdrawn from the cell, and solutes in the cytoplasm(and vacuoles) become more concentrated. The effects of freez-ing are therefore mainly osmoregulatory: the water balance of thecells is upset and cell membranes are destabilized. The effects areessentially similar to those of drought and salinity.
Organisms have at least two differ-
ent metabolic strategies that allow 
survival through the low temperaturesof winter. A ‘freeze-avoiding’ strategy
uses low-molecular-weight polyhydric alcohols (polyols, such asglycerol) that depress both the freezing and the supercooling pointand also ‘thermal hysteresis’ proteins that prevent ice nucleifrom forming (Figure 2.8a, b). A contrasting ‘freeze-tolerant’strategy, which also involves the formation of polyols, encour-ages the formation of extracellular ice, but protects the cellmembranes from damage when water is withdrawn from the cells(Storey, 1990). The tolerances of organisms to low temperaturesare not ﬁxed but are preconditioned by the experience of tem-peratures in their recent past. This process is called acclimation
when it occurs in the laboratory and acclimatization when it
occurs naturally. Acclimatization may start as the weatherbecomes colder in the fall, stimulating the conversion of almostthe entire glycogen reserve of animals into polyols (Figure 2.8c),but this can be an energetically costly affair: about 16% of thecarbohydrate reserve may be consumed in the conversion of theglycogen reserves to polyols.
The exposure of an individual for
several days to a relatively low tem-perature can shift its whole temperature
response downwards along the tem-
perature scale. Similarly, exposure to a high temperature can shiftthe temperature response upwards. Antarctic springtails (tinyarthropods), for instance, when taken from ‘summer’ temperat-
ures in the ﬁeld (around 5°C in the Antarctic) and subjected toa range of acclimation temperatures, responded to temperaturesin the range +2°C to −2°C (indicative of winter) by showing a
marked drop in the temperature at which they froze (Figure 2.9);
but at lower acclimation temperatures still ( −5°C, −7°C), they
showed no such drop because the temperatures were themselvestoo low for the physiological processes required to make the acclimation response.
Acclimatization aside, individuals commonly vary in their
temperature response depending on the stage of development theyhave reached. Probably the most extreme form of this is whenan organism has a dormant stage in its life cycle. Dormant stagesare typically dehydrated, metabolically slow and tolerant of
extremes of temperature.
2.3.5 Genetic variation and the evolution of 
cold tolerance
Even within species there are often differences in temperature
response between populations from different locations, andthese differences have frequently been found to be the result of genetic differences rather than being attributable solely toacclimatization. Powerful evidence that cold tolerance varies
between geographic races of a species comes from a study of thecactus, Opuntia fragilis . Cacti are generally species of hot dry 
habitats, but O. fragilis extends as far north as 56°N and at 
one site the lowest extreme minimum temperature recordedwas −49.4°C. Twenty populations were sampled from diverse 
localities in northern USA and Canada, and were tested for freezing tolerance and ability to acclimate to cold. Individuals from the most freeze-tolerant population (from Manitoba) tolerated −49°C in laboratory tests and acclimated by 19.9°C,
whereas plants from a population in the more equable climate of
Hornby Island, British Columbia, tolerated only −19°C and
acclimated by only 12.1°C (Loik & Nobel, 1993).
There are also striking cases where the geographic range of 
a crop species has been extended into colder regions by plant breeders. Programs of deliberate selection applied to corn ( Zea
mays ) have expanded the area of the USA over which the crop
can be proﬁtably grown. From the 1920s to the 1940s, the pro-duction of corn in Iowa and Illinois increased by around 24%,whereas in the colder state of Wisconsin it increased by 54%.
If deliberate selection can change the tolerance and distribu-
tion of a domesticated plant we should expect natural selectionto have done the same thing in nature. To test this, the plant
Umbilicus rupestris , which lives in mild maritime areas of Great
Britain, was deliberately grown outside its normal range (Wood-ward, 1990). A population of plants and seeds was taken from adonor population in the mild-wintered habitat of Cardiff in thewest and introduced in a cooler environment at an altitude of 
•• ••freeze-avoidance and
freeze-tolerance
acclimation andacclimatizationEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 37•• ••38 CHAPTER 2
Temperature (°C)
–40–20020(b)
Dec Oct Sep Nov Apr Mar Feb JanGlycerol concentration (µmol g–1)
0100020003000(a)
Dec Oct Sep Nov Apr Mar Feb JanGlycogen concentration (µmol g–1)
04008001200(c)
Dec Oct Sep Nov Apr Mar Feb Jan
MonthFigure 2.8 (a) Changes in the glycerol
concentration per gram wet mass of the
freeze-avoiding larvae of the goldenrod gallmoth, Epiblema scudderiana . (b) The daily
temperature maxima and minima (above)
and whole larvae supercooling points(below) over the same period. (c) Changesin glycogen concentration over the sameperiod. (After Rickards et al. , 1987.)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 38••CONDITIONS 39
157 m in Sussex in the south. After 8 years, the temperature
response of seeds from the donor and the introduced populationshad diverged quite strikingly (Figure 2.10a), and subfreezingtemperatures that kill in Cardiff ( −12°C) were then tolerated by 50% of the Sussex population (Figure 2.10b). This suggests that past climatic changes, for example ice ages, will have changedthe temperature tolerance of species as well as forcing theirmigration.
••–6
–10
–14
–22Supercooling point (°C)
Exposure temperature ( °C)1–20
5– 3 – 7–8
–12
–18–16
–5 –1 3Figure 2.9 Acclimation to low
temperatures. Samples of the Antarctic
springtail Cryptopygus antarcticus were taken
from ﬁeld sites in the summer ( c. 5°C) on
a number of days and their supercooling
point (at which they froze) was determinedeither immediately (
/H17033) or after a period of
acclimation ( /H17033) at the temperatures shown.
The supercooling points of the controls
themselves varied because of temperaturevariations from day to day, but acclimationat temperatures in the range +2 to −2°C
(indicative of winter) led to a drop in the
supercooling point, whereas no such dropwas observed at higher temperatures(indicative of summer) or lowertemperatures (too low for a physiologicalacclimation response). Bars are standarderrors. (After Worland & Convey, 2001.)
Germination (%)
22 16064080
10
Temperature ( °C)(a)
2
1
Survival (%)
–14 –804080
–4
Minimum temperature ( °C)(b)
2
–121
Figure 2.10 Changes in the behavior of populations of the plant Umbilicus rupestris , established for a period of 8 years in a cool
environment in Sussex from a donor population in a mild-wintered area in South Wales (Cardiff, UK). (a) Temperature responses o f 
seed germination: (1) responses of samples from the donor population (Cardiff ) in 1978, and (2) responses from the Sussex popul ation in
1987. (b) The low-temperature survival of the donor population at Cardiff, 1978 (1) and of the established population in Sussex , 1987 (2).
(After Woodward, 1990.)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 3940 CHAPTER 2
2.3.6 Life at high temperatures
Perhaps the most important thing about dangerously high 
temperatures is that, for a given organism, they usually lie onlya few degrees above the metabolic optimum. This is largely anunavoidable consequence of the physicochemical properties of mostenzymes (Wharton, 2002). High temperatures may be dangerous
because they lead to the inactivation or even the denaturation ofenzymes, but they may also have damaging indirect effects by lead-ing to dehydration. All terrestrial organisms need to conserve water,and at high temperatures the rate of water loss by evaporationcan be lethal, but they are caught between the devil and the deepblue sea because evaporation is an important means of reducingbody temperature. If surfaces are protected from evaporation (e.g.by closing stomata in plants or spiracles in insects) the organismsmay be killed by too high a body temperature, but if their sur-
faces are not protected they may die of desiccation.
Death Valley, California, in the
summer, is probably the hottest placeon earth in which higher plants makeactive growth. Air temperatures during
the daytime may approach 50°C and soil surface temperatures maybe very much higher. The perennial plant, desert honeysweet(Tidestromia oblongifolia ), grows vigorously in such an environment
despite the fact that its leaves are killed if they reach the sametemperature as the air. Very rapid transpiration keeps the temper-ature of the leaves at 40–45°C, and in this range they are capableof extremely rapid photosynthesis (Berry & Björkman, 1980).
Most of the plant species that live in very hot environments
suffer severe shortage of water and are therefore unable to use
the latent heat of evaporation of water to keep leaf temperaturesdown. This is especially the case in desert succulents in which waterloss is minimized by a low surface to volume ratio and a low frequency of stomata. In such plants the risk of overheating may be reduced by spines (which shade the surface of a cactus)or hairs or waxes (which reﬂect a high proportion of the incidentradiation). Nevertheless, such species experience and toleratetemperatures in their tissues of more than 60°C when the air tem-perature is above 40°C (Smith et al. , 1984).
Fires are responsible for the highest
temperatures that organisms face onearth and, before the ﬁre-raising activ-
ities of humans, were caused mainly by lightning strikes. The recurrent risk of ﬁre has shaped the species composition of arid and semiarid woodlands in many parts of the world. All plants are damaged by burning but it is the remarkable powers 
of regrowth from protected meristems on shoots and seeds thatallow a specialized subset of species to recover from damage andform characteristic ﬁre ﬂoras (see, for example, Hodgkinson, 1992).
Decomposing organic matter in heaps of farmyard manure,
compost heaps and damp hay may reach very high temperatures.Stacks of damp hay are heated to temperatures of 50–60°C bythe metabolism of fungi such as Aspergillus fumigatus , carried fur-
ther to approximately 65°C by other thermophilic fungi such as
Mucor pusillus and then a little further by bacteria and actinomycetes.
Biological activity stops well short of 100°C but autocom-bustible products are formed that cause further heating, drive offwater and may even result in ﬁre. Another hot environment is that of natural hot springs and in these the microbe Thermus
aquaticus grows at temperatures of 67°C and tolerates temper-
atures up to 79°C. This organism has also been isolated from
domestic hot water systems. Many (perhaps all) of the extremelythermophilic species are prokaryotes. In environments with veryhigh temperatures the communities contain few species. In gen-eral, animals and plants are the most sensitive to heat followedby fungi, and in turn by bacteria, actinomycetes and archaebacteria.This is essentially the same order as is found in response to many
other extreme conditions, such as low temperature, salinity,metal toxicity and desiccation.
An ecologically very remarkable
hot environment was ﬁrst describedonly towards the end of the last century.In 1979, a deep oceanic site was dis-covered in the eastern Paciﬁc at which
ﬂuids at high temperatures (‘smokers’) were vented from the sea ﬂoor forming thin-walled ‘chimneys’ of mineral materials. Since that time many more vent sites have been discovered atmid-ocean crests in both the Atlantic and Paciﬁc Oceans. Theylie 2000–4000 m below sea level at pressures of 200–400 bars (20–40 MPa). The boiling point of water is raised to 370°C at 200 bars and to 404°C at 400 bars. The superheated ﬂuid emerges
from the chimneys at temperatures as high as 350°C, and as itcools to the temperature of seawater at about 2°C it provides acontinuum of environments at intermediate temperatures.
Environments at such extreme pressures and temperatures 
are obviously extraordinarily difﬁcult to study in situ and in 
most respects impossible to maintain in the laboratory. Some thermophilic bacteria collected from vents have been cultured successfully at 100°C at only slightly above normal barometricpressures ( Jannasch & Mottl, 1985), but there is much circumstantialevidence that some microbial activity occurs at much highertemperatures and may form the energy resource for the warmwater communities outside the vents. For example, particulateDNA has been found in samples taken from within the ‘smokers’at concentrations that point to intact bacteria being present at temperatures very much higher than those conventionally thoughtto place limits on life (Baross & Deming, 1995).
There is a rich eukaryotic fauna in the local neighborhood of
vents that is quite atypical of the deep oceans in general. At onevent in Middle Valley, Northeast Paciﬁc, surveyed photographic-ally and by video, at least 55 taxa were documented of which 15 were new or probably new species ( Juniper et al. , 1992). There
can be few environments in which so complex and specialized a community depends on so localized a special condition. The 
•• ••thermal vents 
and other hotenvironmentshigh temperatureand water loss
ﬁreEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 40CONDITIONS 41
closest known vents with similar conditions are 2500 km distant.
Such communities add a further list to the planet’s record of speciesrichness. They present tantalizing problems in evolution anddaunting problems for the technology needed to observe, recordand study them.
2.3.7 Temperature as a stimulus
We have seen that temperature as a condition affects the rate at which organisms develop. It may also act as a stimulus, determining whether or not the organism starts its developmentat all. For instance, for many species of temperate, arctic and alpineherbs, a period of chilling or freezing (or even of alternating 
high and low temperatures) is necessary before germination willoccur. A cold experience (physiological evidence that winter haspassed) is required before the plant can start on its cycle ofgrowth and development. Temperature may also interact withother stimuli (e.g. photoperiod) to break dormancy and so time the onset of growth. The seeds of the birch ( Betula
pubescens ) require a photoperiodic stimulus (i.e. experience of a
particular regime of day length) before they will germinate, but ifthe seed has been chilled it starts growth without a light stimulus.
2.4 Correlations between temperature and 
the distribution of plants and animals
2.4.1 Spatial and temporal variations in temperature
Variations in temperature on and within the surface of the earth
have a variety of causes: latitudinal, altitudinal, continental, sea-sonal, diurnal and microclimatic effects and, in soil and water, theeffects of depth.
Latitudinal and seasonal variations cannot really be separated.
The angle at which the earth is tilted relative to the sun changes
with the seasons, and this drives some of the main temperaturedifferentials on the earth’s surface. Superimposed on these broadgeographic trends are the inﬂuences of altitude and ‘continentality’.There is a drop of 1°C for every 100 m increase in altitude in dry air, and a drop of 0.6°C in moist air. This is the result of the‘adiabatic’ expansion of air as atmospheric pressure falls with increas-ing altitude. The effects of continentality are largely attributableto different rates of heating and cooling of the land and the sea.
The land surface reﬂects less heat than the water, so the surfacewarms more quickly, but it also loses heat more quickly. The seatherefore has a moderating, ‘maritime’ effect on the temperaturesof coastal regions and especially islands; both daily and seasonalvariations in temperature are far less marked than at moreinland, continental locations at the same latitude. Moreover,there are comparable effects within land masses: dry, bare areaslike deserts suffer greater daily and seasonal extremes of temperaturethan do wetter areas like forests. Thus, global maps of tempera-
ture zones hide a great deal of local variation.
It is much less widely appreciated
that on a smaller scale still there can bea great deal of microclimatic variation.
For example, the sinking of dense, coldair into the bottom of a valley at night can make it as much as30°C colder than the side of the valley only 100 m higher; thewinter sun, shining on a cold day, can heat the south-facing sideof a tree (and the habitable cracks and crevices within it) to ashigh as 30°C; and the air temperature in a patch of vegetationcan vary by 10°C over a vertical distance of 2.6 m from the soilsurface to the top of the canopy (Geiger, 1955). Hence, we neednot conﬁne our attention to global or geographic patterns whenseeking evidence for the inﬂuence of temperature on the distri-bution and abundance of organisms.
Long-term temporal variations in
temperature, such as those associated
with the ice ages, were discussed in the previous chapter.Between these, however, and the very obvious daily and seasonalchanges that we are all aware of, a number of medium-term patterns have become increasingly apparent. Notable amongst these are the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and theNorth Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) (Figure 2.11) (see Stenseth et
al., 2003). The ENSO originates in the tropical Paciﬁc Ocean off
the coast of South America and is an alternation (Figure 2.11a)between a warm (El Niño) and a cold (La Niña) state of the water
there, though it affects temperature, and the climate generally,in terrestrial and marine environments throughout the whole Paciﬁcbasin (Figure 2.11b; for color, see Plate 2.1, between pp. 000 and000) and beyond. The NAO refers to a north–south alternationin atmospheric mass between the subtropical Atlantic and the Arctic(Figure 2.11c) and again affects climate in general rather than just temperature (Figure 2.11d; for color, see Plate 2.2, between pp. 000 and 000). Positive index values (Figure 2.11c) are associ-
ated, for example, with relatively warm conditions in NorthAmerica and Europe and relatively cool conditions in NorthAfrica and the Middle East. An example of the effect of NAO variation on species abundance, that of cod, Gadus morhua , in the
Barents Sea, is shown in Figure 2.12.
2.4.2 Typical temperatures and distributions
There are very many examples of
plant and animal distributions that arestrikingly correlated with some aspect of environmental temper-ature even at gross taxonomic and systematic levels (Figure 2.13).At a ﬁner scale, the distributions of many species closely match
maps of some aspect of temperature. For example, the northernlimit of the distribution of wild madder plants ( Rubia peregrina )
is closely correlated with the position of the January 4.5°C
•• ••microclimatic
variation
ENSO and NAO
isothermsEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 41•• ••42 CHAPTER 2
–21950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
Year2000Niño 3.4 region (threshold − 0°C)
2
1
0
–1Sea surface temperature anomalies3(a)
Figure 2.11 (a) The El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) from 1950 to 2000 as measured by sea surface temperature anomalies
(differences from the mean) in the equatorial mid-Paciﬁc. The El Niño events ( > 0.4°C above the mean) are shown in dark color, 
and the La Niña events ( > 0.4°C below the mean) are shown in pale color. (Image from http: //www.cgd.ucar.edu/cas/catalog/
climind/Nino _3_3.4_indices.html.) (b) Maps of examples of El Niño (November 1997) and La Niña (February 1999) events in terms 
of sea height above average levels. Warmer seas are higher; for example, a sea height 15–20 cm below average equates to a temper ature
anomaly of approximately 2–3°C. (Image from http: //topex-www.jpl.nasa.gov/science/images/el-nino-la-nina.jpg .) (For color, see 
Plate 2.1, between pp. 000 and 000.) 
(b)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 42•• ••CONDITIONS 43
–4
1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 19806(c)
Year(Ln – S n)
200024
0
–2
Figure 2.11 (continued ) (c) The North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) from 1864 to 2003 as measured by the normalized sea-level 
pressure difference ( Ln−Sn) between Lisbon, Portugal and Reykjavik, Iceland. (Image from http: //www.cgd.ucar.edu/~jhurrell/
nao.stat.winter.html#winter .) (d) Typical winter conditions when the NAO index is positive or negative. Conditions that are more than
usually warm, cold, dry or wet are indicated. (Image from http: //www.ldeo.columbia.edu/NAO/ .) (For color, see Plate 2.2, between 
pp. 000 and 000.)(d)(i) (d)(ii)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 4344 CHAPTER 2
isotherm (Figure 2.14a; an isotherm is a line on a map joining places
that experience the same temperature – in this case a January meanof 4.5°C). However, we need to be very careful how we inter-pret such relationships: they can be extremely valuable in predictingwhere we might and might not ﬁnd a particular species; they 
may suggest that some feature related to temperature is import-ant in the life of the organisms; but they do not prove that tem-perature causes the limits to a species’ distribution. The literature
relevant to this and many other correlations between temperatureand distribution patterns is reviewed by Hengeveld (1990), whoalso describes a more subtle graphical procedure. The minimum temperature of the coldest month and the maximum temperatureof the hottest month are estimated for many places within andoutside the range of a species. Each location is then plotted on a
graph of maximum against minimum temperature, and a line isdrawn that optimally discriminates between the presence andabsence records (Figure 2.14b). This line is then used to deﬁnethe geographic margin of the species distributions (Figure 2.14c).
This may have powerful predictive value, but it still tells us nothing about the underlying forces that cause the distributionpatterns.
One reason why we need to be cautious about reading too
much into correlations of species distributions with maps of tem-perature is that the temperatures measured for constructingisotherms for a map are only rarely those that the organisms expe-rience. In nature an organism may choose to lie in the sun or hide
•• ••log(abundance age 3 in 1000s)
4.5
–58.0
NAO index7.5
7.06.56.05.55.0
6 – 4 – 3 – 2 – 1 012345log(abundance age 3 in 1000s)
4.5
508.0
Length of 5-month-old cod (mm)7.5
7.06.56.05.55.0
100 60 70 80 90
Temperature (°C)
2.5
–55
NAO index4.5
4
3.5
3
6 – 4 – 3 – 2 – 1 012345Length of 5-month-old cod (mm)
50
2.5100
Temperature ( °C)90
807060
5 3 3.5 4 4.5(a)
(d)(b)
(c)
Figure 2.12 (a) The abundance of 3-year-old cod, Gadus morhua , in the Barents Sea is positively correlated with the value of the North
Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) index for that year. The mechanism underlying this correlation is suggested in (b–d). (b) Annual mea n
temperature increases with the NAO index. (c) The length of 5-month-old cod increases with annual mean temperature. (d) The
abundance of cod at age 3 increases with their length at 5 months. (After Ottersen et al. , 2001.)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 44CONDITIONS 45
in the shade and, even in a single day, may experience a baking
midday sun and a freezing night. Moreover, temperature variesfrom place to place on a far ﬁner scale than will usually concerna geographer, but it is the conditions in these ‘microclimates’ thatwill be crucial in determining what is habitable for a particular
species. For example, the prostrate shrub Dryas octopetala is
restricted to altitudes exceeding 650 m in North Wales, UK,
where it is close to its southern limit. But to the north, inSutherland in Scotland, where it is generally colder, it is foundright down to sea level.
2.4.3 Distributions and extreme conditions
For many species, distributions are accounted for not so much
by average temperatures as by occasional extremes, especially occasional lethal temperatures that preclude its existence. Forinstance, injury by frost is probably the single most important fac-tor limiting plant distribution. To take one example: the saguaro
cactus ( Carnegiea gigantea ) is liable to be killed when temperatures
remain below freezing for 36 h, but if there is a daily thaw it isunder no threat. In Arizona, the northern and eastern edges ofthe cactus’ distribution correspond to a line joining places whereon occasional days it fails to thaw. Thus, the saguaro is absentwhere there are occasionally lethal conditions – an individual needonly be killed once.
Similarly, there is scarcely any crop
that is grown on a large commercial
scale in the climatic conditions of its wild ancestors, and it is wellknown that crop failures are often caused by extreme events, espe-cially frosts and drought. For instance, the climatic limit to thegeographic range for the production of coffee ( Coffea arabica and
C. robusta ) is deﬁned by the 13°C isotherm for the coldest month
of the year. Much of the world’s crop is produced in the high-land microclimates of the São Paulo and Paraná districts of
•• ••
Number of families
20 0 –40 –60100200
–20
Temperature ( °C)Northern hemisphere
Southern hemisphere
(a)
4.5°C
Temperature in warmest month (°C)
2 –8 –120–14101218
–10
Temperature in coldest month ( °C)(b)
–6 –4 –2 01416(c)
20Figure 2.13 The relationship between absolute minimum
temperature and the number of families of ﬂowering plants in the
northern and southern hemispheres. (After Woodward, 1987, whoalso discusses the limitations to this sort of analysis and how thehistory of continental isolation may account for the odd difference
between northern and southern hemispheres.)
Figure 2.14 (a) The northern limit of the distribution of the wild madder ( Rubia peregrina ) is closely correlated with the position of 
the January 4.5°C isotherm. (After Cox et al. , 1976.) (b) A plot of places within the range of Tilia cordat (
/H17033), and outside its range ( 7) in 
the graphic space deﬁned by the minimum temperature of the coldest month and the maximum temperature of the warmest month. 
(c) Margin of the geographic range of T. cordata in northern Europe deﬁned by the straight line in (b). ((b, c) after Hintikka, 1963; from
Hengeveld, 1990.)you only die onceEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 4546 CHAPTER 2
Brazil. Here, the average minimum temperature is 20°C, but 
occasionally cold winds and just a few hours of temperature close to freezing are sufﬁcient to kill or severely damage the trees(and play havoc with world coffee prices).
2.4.4 Distributions and the interaction of temperature
with other factors
Although organisms respond to each condition in their environ-ment, the effects of conditions may be determined largely by theresponses of other community members. Temperature does notact on just one species: it also acts on its competitors, prey, para-sites and so on. This, as we saw in Section 2.2, was the difference
between a fundamental niche (where an organism could live) and
a realized niche (where it actually lived). For example, an organ-
ism will suffer if its food is another species that cannot toleratean environmental condition. This is illustrated by the distributionof the rush moth ( Coleophora alticolella ) in England. The moth lays
its eggs on the ﬂowers of the rush Juncus squarrosus and the cater-
pillars feed on the developing seeds. Above 600 m, the moths andcaterpillars are little affected by the low temperatures, but the rush,although it grows, fails to ripen its seeds. This, in turn, limits the
distribution of the moth, because caterpillars that hatch in the colderelevations will starve as a result of insufﬁcient food (Randall, 1982).
The effects of conditions on disease
may also be important. Conditionsmay favor the spread of infection
(winds carrying fungal spores), or favor the growth of the para-site, or weaken the defenses of the host. For example, during anepidemic of southern corn leaf blight ( Helminthosporium maydis )
in a corn ﬁeld in Connecticut, the plants closest to the trees that were shaded for the longest periods were the most heavilydiseased (Figure 2.15).Competition between species can
also be profoundly inﬂuenced by 
environmental conditions, especiallytemperature. Two stream salmonid ﬁshes, Salvelinus malma and 
S. leucomaenis , coexist at intermediate altitudes (and therefore 
intermediate temperatures) on Hokkaido Island, Japan, whereas
only the former lives at higher altitudes (lower temperatures) and only the latter at lower altitudes (see also Section 8.2.1). Areversal, by a change in temperature, of the outcome of com-petition between the species appears to play a key role in this.For example, in experimental streams supporting the two speciesmaintained at 6°C over a 191-day period (a typical high altitudetemperature), the survival of S. malma was far superior to that of
S. leucomaenis ; whereas at 12°C (typical low altitude), both species
survived less well, but the outcome was so far reversed that by
around 90 days all of the S. malma had died (Figure 2.16). Both
species are quite capable, alone, of living at either temperature.
Many of the interactions between
temperature and other physical condi-tions are so strong that it is not sensi-ble to consider them separately. Therelative humidity of the atmosphere, for example, is an import-ant condition in the life of terrestrial organisms because it plays
a major part in determining the rate at which they lose water. Inpractice, it is rarely possible to make a clean distinction betweenthe effects of relative humidity and of temperature. This is simplybecause a rise in temperature leads to an increased rate of eva-poration. A relative humidity that is acceptable to an organism ata low temperature may therefore be unacceptable at a higher tem-perature. Microclimatic variations in relative humidity can be evenmore marked than those involving temperature. For instance, itis not unusual for the relative humidity to be almost 100% at groundlevel amongst dense vegetation and within the soil, whilst the airimmediately above, perhaps 40 cm away, has a relative humidity
•• ••15
10
5
01357
Row number from shading trees at edge of field91 1 1 3 1 5Percentage leaf area infectedFigure 2.15 The incidence of southern
corn leaf blight ( Helminthosporium maydis )
on corn growing in rows at various
distances from trees that shaded them.Wind-borne fungal diseases were
responsible for most of this mortality(Harper, 1955). (From Lukens & Mullany, 1972.)
diseasecompetition
temperature and
humidityEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 46CONDITIONS 47
of only 50%. The organisms most obviously affected by humid-
ity in their distribution are those ‘terrestrial’ animals that are actually, in terms of the way they control their water balance, ‘aquatic’. Amphibians, terrestrial isopods, nematodes, earthworms and molluscs are all, at least in their active stages,
conﬁned to microenvironments where the relative humidity is ator very close to 100%. The major group of animals to escape suchconﬁnement are the terrestrial arthropods, especially insects.Even here though, the evaporative loss of water often conﬁnestheir activities to habitats (e.g. woodlands) or times of day (e.g.dusk) when relative humidity is relatively high.
2.5 pH of soil and water
The pH of soil in terrestrial environments or of water in aquatic
ones is a condition that can exert a powerful inﬂuence on the dis-tribution and abundance of organisms. The protoplasm of the rootcells of most vascular plants is damaged as a direct result of toxicconcentrations of H
+or OH−ions in soils below pH 3 or above
pH 9, respectively. Further, indirect effects occur because soil pHinﬂuences the availability of nutrients and/or the concentrationof toxins (Figure 2.17).
Increased acidity (low pH) may act in three ways: (i) directly,
by upsetting osmoregulation, enzyme activity or gaseous exchange
across respiratory surfaces; (ii) indirectly, by increasing the con-centration of toxic heavy metals, particularly aluminum (Al
3+) but
also manganese (Mn2+) and iron (Fe3+), which are essential plant
nutrients at higher pHs; and (iii) indirectly, by reducing the qual-
ity and range of food sources available to animals (e.g. fungalgrowth is reduced at low pH in streams (Hildrew et al. , 1984) and
the aquatic ﬂora is often absent or less diverse). Tolerance limits
for pH vary amongst plant species, but only a minority are ableto grow and reproduce at a pH below about 4.5.
In alkaline soils, iron (Fe
3+) and phosphate (PO43+), and certain
trace elements such as manganese (Mn2+), are ﬁxed in relativelyinsoluble compounds, and plants may then suffer because thereis too little rather than too much of them. For example, calcifugeplants (those characteristic of acid soils) commonly show symp-toms of iron deﬁciency when they are transplanted to more alka-line soils. In general, however, soils and waters with a pH above7 tend to be hospitable to many more species than those that aremore acid. Chalk and limestone grasslands carry a much richerﬂora (and associated fauna) than acid grasslands and the situationis similar for animals inhabiting streams, ponds and lakes.
Some prokaryotes, especially the Archaebacteria, can tolerate
and even grow best in environments with a pH far outside the
range tolerated by eukaryotes. Such environments are rare, butoccur in volcanic lakes and geothermal springs where they are
•• ••1.0
0Survival rate function
Experiment period (days)100 2000.5
0 100 200 06°C1 2 °CS. malma
S. leucomaenis
Figure 2.16 Changing temperature
reverses the outcome of competition. 
At low temperature (6°C) on the left, thesalmonid ﬁsh Salvelinus malma outsurvives
cohabiting S. leucomaenis , whereas at 12°C,
on the right, S. leucomaenis drives S. malma
to extinction. Both species are quite
capable, alone, of living at eithertemperature. (After Taniguchi & Nakano, 2000.)
9 6 45
pH38 7MoFe and MnCu and ZnKCa and MgP and BN and S mobilizationAlH+ and OH– toxicity
Fgiure 2.17 The toxicity of H+and OH−to plants, and the
availability to them of minerals (indicated by the widths of 
the bands) is inﬂuenced by soil pH. (After Larcher, 1980.)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 4748 CHAPTER 2
dominated by sulfur-oxidizing bacteria whose pH optima lie
between 2 and 4 and which cannot grow at neutrality (Stolp, 1988).Thiobacillus ferroxidans occurs in the waste from industrial metal-
leaching processes and tolerates pH 1; T.thiooxidans cannot only
tolerate but can grow at pH 0. Towards the other end of the 
pH range are the alkaline environments of soda lakes with pHvalues of 9–11, which are inhabited by cyanobacteria such asAnabaenopsis arnoldii and Spirulina platensis ; Plectonema nostocorum
can grow at pH 13.
2.6 Salinity
For terrestrial plants, the concentration of salts in the soil water
offers osmotic resistance to water uptake. The most extreme salineconditions occur in arid zones where the predominant movementof soil water is towards the surface and cystalline salt accumu-lates. This occurs especially when crops have been grown in 
arid regions under irrigation; salt pans then develop and the landis lost to agriculture. The main effect of salinity is to create thesame kind of osmoregulatory problems as drought and freezingand the problems are countered in much the same ways. For example, many of the higher plants that live in saline environ-ments (halophytes) accumulate electrolytes in their vacuoles, butmaintain a low concentration in the cytoplasm and organelles(Robinson et al. , 1983). Such plants maintain high osmotic pres-
sures and so remain turgid, and are protected from the damaging
action of the accumulated electrolytes by polyols and membraneprotectants.
Freshwater environments present a set of specialized environ-
mental conditions because water tends to move into organismsfrom the environment and this needs to be resisted. In marine
habitats, the majority of organisms are isotonic to their environ-ment so that there is no net ﬂow of water, but there are manythat are hypotonic so that water ﬂows out from the organism tothe environment, putting them in a similar position to terrestrialorganisms. Thus, for many aquatic organisms the regulation ofbody ﬂuid concentration is a vital and sometimes an energeticallyexpensive process. The salinity of an aquatic environment can havean important inﬂuence on distribution and abundance, especiallyin places like estuaries where there is a particularly sharp gradi-
ent between truly marine and freshwater habitats.
The freshwater shrimps Palaemonetes pugio and P. vulgaris , for
example, co-occur in estuaries on the eastern coat of the USA at a wide range of salinities, but the former seems to be moretolerant of lower salinities than the latter, occupying some habitats from which the latter is absent. Figure 2.18 shows themechanism likely to be underlying this (Rowe, 2002). Over thelow salinity range (though not at the effectively lethal lowest salin-
ity) metabolic expenditure was signiﬁcantly lower in P. pugio . 
P. vulgaris requires far more energy simply to maintain itself, 
putting it at a severe disadvantage in competition with P. pugio
even when it is able to sustain such expenditure.
2.6.1 Conditions at the boundary between the sea 
and land
Salinity has important effects on the distribution of organisms 
in intertidal areas but it does so through interactions with otherconditions – notably exposure to the air and the nature of the substrate.
•• ••Standard metabolic expenditure (J day–1)33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
Salinity (ppt)0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 35 30 25 20 15 10Overall mean,
P. vulgaris  (24.85)
Overall mean,
P. pugio  (22.91)P. pugio
P. vulgaris
Figure 2.18 Standard metabolic
expenditure (estimated through minimum
oxygen consumption) in two species ofshrimp, Palaemonetes pugio and P. vulgaris ,
at a range of salinities. There was
signiﬁcant mortality of both species overthe experimental period at 0.5 ppt (partsper thousand), especially in P. vulgaris (75%
compared with 25%). (After Rowe, 2002.)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 48CONDITIONS 49
Algae of all types have found suitable habitats permanently
immersed in the sea, but permanently submerged higher plants
are almost completely absent. This is a striking contrast with submerged freshwater habitats where a variety of ﬂoweringplants have a conspicuous role. The main reason seems to be that
higher plants require a substrate in which their roots can ﬁndanchorage. Large marine algae, which are continuously sub-merged except at extremely low tides, largely take their place in marine communities. These do not have roots but attachthemselves to rocks by specialized ‘holdfasts’. They are excludedfrom regions where the substrates are soft and holdfasts cannot‘hold fast’. It is in such regions that the few truly marine ﬂower-ing plants, for example sea grasses such as Zostera and Posidonia ,
form submerged communities that support complex animal
communities.
Most species of higher plants that
root in seawater have leaves and shootsthat are exposed to the atmosphere for a large part of the tidal cycle, such
as mangroves, species of the grass genus Spartina and extreme halo-
phytes such as species of Salicornia that have aerial shoots but whose
roots are exposed to the full salinity of seawater. Where there is a stable substrate in which plants can root, communities of ﬂowering plants may extend right through the intertidal zone in a continuum extending from those continuously immersed in
full-strength seawater (like the sea grasses) through to totally non-saline conditions. Salt marshes, in particular, encompass a rangeof salt concentrations running from full-strength seawater downto totally nonsaline conditions.
Higher plants are absent from intertidal rocky sea shores
except where pockets of soft substrate may have formed in
crevices. Instead, such habitats are dominated by the algae,which give way to lichens at and above the high tide level wherethe exposure to desiccation is highest. The plants and animals thatlive on rocky sea shores are inﬂuenced by environmental condi-tions in a very profound and often particularly obvious way bythe extent to which they tolerate exposure to the aerial environ-ment and the forces of waves and storms. This expresses itself in
the zonation of the organisms, with different species at different
heights up the shore (Figure 2.19).
The extent of the intertidal zone
depends on the height of tides and theslope of the shore. Away from the shore, the tidal rise and fallare rarely greater than 1 m, but closer to shore, the shape of theland mass can funnel the ebb and ﬂow of the water to produceextraordinary spring tidal ranges of, for example, nearly 20 m inthe Bay of Fundy (between Nova Scotia and New Brunswick,Canada). In contrast, the shores of the Mediterranean Sea 
•• ••Figure 2.19 A general zonation scheme
for the seashore determined by relative
lengths of exposure to the air and to theaction of waves. (After Raffaelli &Hawkins, 1996.)Land
SeaSupralittoral zone
Upper limit of lamination seaweedsUpper limit of barnaclesUpper limit of periwinkle snails Supralittoral fringe
Midlittoral zone
Infralittoral
zoneInfralittoral
fringeLittoral zonealgae and higher
plantszonationEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 4950 CHAPTER 2
experience scarcely any tidal range. On steep shores and rocky
cliffs the intertidal zone is very short and zonation is compressed.
To talk of ‘zonation as a result of exposure’, however, is to
oversimplify the matter greatly (Raffaelli & Hawkins, 1996). Inthe ﬁrst place, ‘exposure’ can mean a variety, or a combination
of, many different things: desiccation, extremes of temperature,changes in salinity, excessive illumination and the sheer physicalforces of pounding waves and storms (to which we turn inSection 2.7). Furthermore, ‘exposure’ only really explains theupper limits of these essentially marine species, and yet zonation
depends on them having lower limits too. For some speciesthere can be too little exposure in the lower zones. For instance,
green algae would be starved of blue and especially red light if they were submerged for long periods too low down the
shore. For many other species though, a lower limit to distribu-tion is set by competition and predation (see, for example, thediscussion in Paine, 1994). The seaweed Fucus spiralis will readily
extend lower down the shore than usual in Great Britain wheneverother competing midshore fucoid seaweeds are scarce.
2.7 Physical forces of winds, waves and currents
In nature there are many forces of the environment that have their
effect by virtue of the force of physical movement – wind andwater are prime examples.
In streams and rivers, both plants and animals face the con-
tinual hazard of being washed away. The average velocity of ﬂow
generally increases in a downstream direction, but the greatestdanger of members of the benthic (bottom-dwelling) communitybeing washed away is in upstream regions, because the water hereis turbulent and shallow. The only plants to be found in the mostextreme ﬂows are literally ‘low proﬁle’ species like encrusting and ﬁlamentous algae, mosses and liverworts. Where the ﬂow isslightly less extreme there are plants like the water crowfoot(Ranunculus ﬂuitans ), which is streamlined, offering little resistance
to ﬂow and which anchors itself around an immovable object 
by means of a dense development of adventitious roots. Plantssuch as the free-ﬂoating duckweed ( Lemna spp.) are usually only
found where there is negligible ﬂow.
The conditions of exposure on sea shores place severe limits
on the life forms and habits of species that can tolerate repeatedpounding and the suction of wave action. Seaweeds anchored on rocks survive the repeated pull and push of wave action by a combination of powerful attachment by holdfasts and extremeﬂexibility of their thallus structure. Animals in the same envir-onment either move with the mass of water or, like the algae,rely on subtle mechanisms of ﬁrm adhesion such as the power-ful organic glues of barnacles and the muscular feet of limpets.A comparable diversity of morphological specializations is to 
be found amongst the invertebrates that tolerate the hazards ofturbulent, freshwater streams.2.7.1 Hazards, disasters and catastrophes: 
the ecology of extreme events
The wind and the tides are normal daily ‘hazards’ in the life of
many organisms. The structure and behavior of these organismsbear some witness to the frequency and intensity of such hazardsin the evolutionary history of their species. Thus, most trees with-stand the force of most storms without falling over or losing their
living branches. Most limpets, barnacles and kelps hold fast to therocks through the normal day to day forces of the waves and tides.We can also recognize a scale of more severely damaging forces(we might call them ‘disasters’) that occur occasionally, but withsufﬁcient frequency to have contributed repeatedly to the forcesof natural selection. When such a force recurs it will meet a popu-lation that still has a genetic memory of the selection that actedon its ancestors – and may therefore suffer less than they did. In the woodlands and shrub communities of arid zones, ﬁre has
this quality, and tolerance of ﬁre damage is a clearly evolvedresponse (see Section 2.3.6).
When disasters strike natural communities it is only rarely 
that they have been carefully studied before the event. Oneexception is cyclone ‘Hugo’ which struck the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe in 1994. Detailed accounts of the dense humidforests of the island had been published only recently before (Ducrey& Labbé, 1985, 1986). The cyclone devastated the forests with meanmaximum wind velocities of 270 km h
−1and gusts of 320 km h−1.
Up to 300 mm of rain fell in 40 h. The early stages of regenera-
tion after the cyclone (Labbé, 1994) typify the responses of long-established communities on both land or sea to massive forcesof destruction. Even in ‘undisturbed’ communities there is a con-
tinual creation of gaps as individuals (e.g. trees in a forest, kelpson a sea shore) die and the space they occupied is recolonized(see Section 16.7). After massive devastation by cyclones orother widespread disasters, recolonization follows much thesame course. Species that normally colonize only natural gaps inthe vegetation come to dominate a continuous community.
In contrast to conditions that we have called ‘hazards’ and 
‘disasters’ there are natural occurrences that are enormouslydamaging, yet occur so rarely that they may have no lasting 
selective effect on the evolution of the species. We might call such events ‘catastrophes’, for example the volcanic eruption ofMt St Helens or of the island of Krakatau. The next time thatKrakatau erupts there are unlikely to be any genes persisting thatwere selected for volcano tolerance!
2.8 Environmental pollution
A number of environmental conditions that are, regrettably,
becoming increasingly important are due to the accumulation oftoxic by-products of human activities. Sulfur dioxide emitted frompower stations, and metals like copper, zinc and lead, dumped
•• ••EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 50CONDITIONS 51
around mines or deposited around reﬁneries, are just some of the
pollutants that limit distributions, especially of plants. Many suchpollutants are present naturally but at low concentrations, and someare indeed essential nutrients for plants. But in polluted areas theirconcentrations can rise to lethal levels. The loss of species is often
the ﬁrst indication that pollution has occurred, and changes in thespecies richness of a river, lake or area of land provide bioassaysof the extent of their pollution (see, for example, Lovett Doustet al. , 1994).
Yet it is rare to ﬁnd even the most
inhospitable polluted areas entirelydevoid of species; there are usually at
least a few individuals of a few species that can tolerate the con-ditions. Even natural populations from unpolluted areas often 
contain a low frequency of individuals that tolerate the pollutant;this is part of the genetic variability present in natural populations.Such individuals may be the only ones to survive or colonize aspollutant levels rise. They may then become the founders of atolerant population to which they have passed on their ‘tolerance’genes, and, because they are the descendants of just a few founders,such populations may exhibit notably low genetic diversity overall(Figure 2.20). Moreover, species themselves may differ greatly intheir ability to tolerate pollutants. Some plants, for example, are‘hyperaccumulators’ of heavy metals – lead, cadmium and so on– with an ability not only to tolerate but also to accumulate muchhigher concentrations than the norm (Brooks, 1998). As a result,such plants may have an important role to play in ‘bioremedia-
tion’ (Salt et al. , 1998), removing pollutants from the soil so thateventually other, less tolerant plants can grow there too (discussed
further in Section 7.2.1).
Thus, in very simple terms, a pollutant has a twofold effect.
When it is newly arisen or is at extremely high concentrations,there will be few individuals of any species present (the exceptions
being naturally tolerant variants or their immediate descendants).Subsequently, however, the polluted area is likely to support amuch higher density of individuals, but these will be representat-ives of a much smaller range of species than would be present inthe absence of the pollutant. Such newly evolved, species-poorcommunities are now an established part of human environments(Bradshaw, 1987).
Pollution can of course have its effects far from the original
source (Figure 2.21). Toxic efﬂuents from a mine or a factory may
enter a watercourse and affect its ﬂora and fauna for its wholelength downstream. Efﬂuents from large industrial complexes canpollute and change the ﬂora and fauna of many rivers and lakesin a region and cause international disputes.
A striking example is the creation of
‘acid rain’ – for example that falling inIreland and Scandinavia from indus-trial activities in other countries. Since the Industrial Revolution,the burning of fossil fuels and the consequent emission to the atmosphere of various pollutants, notably sulfur dioxide, hasproduced a deposition of dry acidic particles and rain that is essen-tially dilute sulfuric acid. Our knowledge of the pH tolerances of diatom species enables an approximate pH history of a lake to
be constructed. The history of the acidiﬁcation of lakes is often
•• ••Kangaroo Island
Middle Beach
Edinburgh
Port Pirie
BSIBond Sharing Index (BSI)/ Matching Index (MI)10.20
0.4
0.60.8Increasing genetic diversity
MI (isopod)(b)
Middle Beach
Port PirieLC 50 (multiples of the concentrations of
metals in the substratum at Port Pirie)
Winter Summer0101214
8
642(a)
Figure 2.20 The response of the marine isopod, Platynympha longicaudata , to pollution around the largest lead smelting operation in 
the world, Port Pirie, South Australia. (a) Tolerance, both summer and winter, was signiﬁcantly higher ( P<0.05) than for animals from 
a control (unpolluted) site, as measured by the concentration in food of a combination of metals (lead, copper, cadmium, zinc a nd
manganese) required to kill 50% of the population (LC50). (b) Genetic diversity at Port Pirie was signiﬁcantly lower than at th ree
unpolluted sites, as measured by two indices of diversity based on RAPDs (random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA). (After Ross et al. , 2002.)
rare tolerators
acid rainEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 51••52 CHAPTER 2
recorded in the succession of diatom species accumulated in lake
sediments (Flower et al. , 1994). Figure 2.22, for example, shows
how diatom species composition has changed in Lough Maam,Ireland – far from major industrial sites. The percentage of vari-ous diatom species at different depths reﬂects the ﬂora presentat various times in the past (four species are illustrated). The age
of layers of sediment can be determined by the radioactive decayof lead-210 (and other elements). We know the pH tolerance ofthe diatom species from their present distribution and this can beused to reconstruct what the pH of the lake has been in the past.Note how the waters acidiﬁed since about 1900. The diatomsFragilaria virescens and Brachysira vitrea have declined markedly dur-
ing this period while the acid-tolerant Cymbella perpusilla and
Frustulia rhomboides increased after 1900.
2.9 Global change
In Chapter 1 we discussed some of the ways in which global 
environments have changed over the long timescales involved in continental drift and the shorter timescales of the repeated ice ages. Over these timescales some organisms have failed toaccommodate to the changes and have become extinct, others have
migrated so that they continue to experience the same conditionsbut in a different place, and it is probable that others havechanged their nature (evolved) and tolerated some of thechanges. We now turn to consider global changes that are occur-ring in our own lifetimes – consequences of our own activities –and that are predicted, in most scenarios, to bring about profoundchanges in the ecology of the planet.
2.9.1 Industrial gases and the greenhouse effect
A major element of the Industrial Revolution was the switch from
the use of sustainable fuels to the use of coal (and later, oil) as a source of power. Between the middle of the 19th and themiddle of the 20th century the burning of fossil fuels, togetherwith extensive deforestation, added about 9 ×10
10tonnes of carbon 
dioxide (CO2) to the atmosphere and even more has been added
since. The concentration of CO2in the atmosphere before the
Industrial Revolution (measured in gas trapped in ice cores) wasabout 280 ppm, a fairly typical interglacial ‘peak’ (Figure 2.23), but this had risen to around 370 ppm by around the turn of themillennium and is still rising (see Figure 18.22).
Solar radiation incident on the earth’s atmosphere is in part
reﬂected, in part absorbed, and part is transmitted through to the
earth’s surface, which absorbs and is warmed by it. Some of thisabsorbed energy is radiated back to the atmosphere where atmo-spheric gases, mainly water vapor and CO
2absorb about 70% of
it. It is this trapped reradiated energy that heats the atmosphere
in what is called the ‘greenhouse effect’. The greenhouse effectwas of course part of the normal environment before theIndustrial Revolution and carried responsibility for some of 
the environmental warmth before industrial activity started toenhance it. At that time, atmospheric water vapor was respons-ible for the greater portion of the greenhouse effect.
••25
101025100
25010025105001000
1002501000
2000
3000
40001000100 250
5005002000
1000500
Figure 2.21 An example of long-distance environmental
pollution. The distribution in Great Britain of fallout of radioactive
caesium (Bq m−2) from the Chernobyl nuclear accident in the
Soviet Union in 1986. The map shows the persistence of thepollutant on acid upland soils where it is recycled through soils,plants and animals. Sheep in the upland areas contained morecaesium-137 (
137Cs) in 1987 and 1988 (after recycling) than in 1986.
137Cs has a half-life of 30 years! On typical lowland soils it is more
quickly immobilized and does not persist in the food chains. (After NERC, 1990.)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 52••CONDITIONS 53
In addition to the enhancement 
of greenhouse effects by increased
CO2, other trace gases have increased
markedly in the atmosphere, particularlymethane (CH
4) (Figure 2.24a; and compare this with the his-
torical record in Figure 2.23), nitrous oxide (N2O) and the
chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs, e.g. trichloroﬂuoromethane (CCl3F)
and dichlorodiﬂuoromethane (CCl2F2)). Together, these and
other gases contribute almost as much to enhancing the green-house effect as does the rise in CO
2(Figure 2.24b). The increase
in CH4is not all explained but probably has a microbial origin in
intensive agriculture on anaerobic soils (especially increased riceproduction) and in the digestive process of ruminants (a cow pro-duces approximately 40 litres of CH
4each day); around 70% of
its production is anthropogenic (Khalil, 1999). The effect of theCFCs from refrigerants, aerosol propellants and so on is poten-tially great, but international agreements at least appear to havehalted further rises in their concentrations (Khalil, 1999).
It should be possible to draw up a balance sheet that shows
how the CO
2produced by human activities translates into the
changes in concentration in the atmosphere. Human activities
••Percent03 010
Brachysira vitrea
20Date A.D.
1988
1969
1940
19035.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0pH
0
10
20
30
40
03 010
Fragilaria virescens
20 01 0
Frustulia rhomboidesSediment depth (cm)0
405
10
15
302520
02 035
10Cymbella perpusilla
Figure 2.22 The history of the diatom ﬂora of an Irish lake (Lough Maam, County Donegal) can be traced by taking cores from the
sediment at the bottom of the lake. The percentage of various diatom species at different depths reﬂects the ﬂora present at va rious times
in the past (four species are illustrated). The age of the layers of sediment can be determined by the radioactive decay of lea d-210 (and
other elements). We know the pH tolerance of the diatom species from their present distribution and this can be used to reconst ruct what
the pH of the lake has been in the past. Note how the waters have been acidiﬁed since about 1900. The diatoms Fragilaria virescens and
Brachysira vitrea have declined markedly during this period, while the acid-tolerant Cymbella perpusilla and Frustulia rhomboides have
increased. (After Flower et al. , 1994.)
CO2– but not 
only CO2CO2 (ppm)
0 100,000 300,000 400,000200240280
200,000
Age BP (years)CH4 (ppb)
400600700
500
Figure 2.23 Concentrations of CO2and methane (CH4) in gas
trapped in ice cores from Vostok, Antarctica deposited over the
past 420,000 years. Estimated temperatures are very stronglycorrelated with these. Thus, transitions between glacial and warm epochs occurred around 335,000, 245,000, 135,000 and
18,000 years ago. BP, before present; ppb, parts per billion; ppm,parts per million. (After Petit et al. , 1999; Stauffer, 2000.)EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 5354 CHAPTER 2
release 5.1–7.5 ×109metric tons of carbon to the atmosphere each
year. But the increase in atmospheric CO2(2.9×109metric tons)
accounts for only 60% of this, a percentage that has remained
remarkably constant for 40 years (Hansen et al. , 1999). The
oceans absorb CO2from the atmosphere, and it is estimated that
they may absorb 1.8–2.5 ×109metric tons of the carbon released
by human activities. Recent analyses also indicate that terrestrialvegetation has been ‘fertilized’ by the increased atmosphericCO
2, so that a considerable amount of extra carbon has been locked
up in vegetation biomass (Kicklighter et al. , 1999). This softening
of the blow by the oceans and terrestrial vegetation notwith-standing, however, atmospheric CO
2and the greenhouse effect
are increasing. We return to the question of global carbon budgets in Section 18.4.6.
2.9.2 Global warming
We started this chapter discussing temperature, moved througha number of other environmental conditions to pollutants, andnow return to temperature because of the effects of those pollu-tants on global temperatures. It appears that the present air temperature at the land surface is 0.6 ±0.2°C warmer than in 
preindustrial times (Figure 2.25), and temperatures are predicted
to continue to rise by a further 1.4–5.8°C by 2100 (IPCC, 2001).Such changes will probably lead to a melting of the ice caps, aconsequent rising of sea level and large changes in the pattern ofglobal climates and the distribution of species. Predictions of 
the extent of global warming resulting from the enhanced green-house effect come from two sources: (i) predictions based on sophisticated computer models (‘general circulation models’)that simulate the world’s climate; and (ii) trends detected in mea-sured data sets, including the width of tree rings, sea-level records
and measures of the rate of retreat of glaciers.
Not surprisingly, different global
circulation models differ in their pre-dictions of the rise in global tempera-ture that will result from predictedincreases in CO
2. However, most model predictions vary only from
2.3 to 5.2°C (most of the variation is accounted for by the way
in which the effects of cloud cover are modeled), and a projectedrise of 3–4°C in the next 100 years seems a reasonable value fromwhich to make projections of ecological effects (Figure 2.26).
But temperature regimes are, of course, only part of the 
set of conditions that determine which organisms live where.
Unfortunately, we can place much less faith in computer projec-tions of rainfall and evaporation because it is very hard to buildgood models of cloud behavior into a general model of climate.If we consider only temperature as a relevant variable, we wouldproject a 3°C rise in temperature giving London (UK) the climateof Lisbon (Portugal) (with an appropriate vegetation of olives, vines,Bougainvillea and semiarid scrub). But with more reliable rain it
would be nearly subtropical, and with a little less it might qualify
for the status of an arid zone!
•• ••Concentrated CH4 (ppb)
2000 1960 19208001900140016001800
1940
Year(a)
10001200
1980
Calculated temperature change (°C)
0.0CO20.30.40.5
Trace gas(b)
0.10.2
CFCs CH4 N2O
Figure 2.24 (a) Concentration of methane (CH4) in the atmosphere through the 20th century. (b) Estimates of global warming over the
period 1850–1990 caused by CO2and other major greenhouse gases. (After Khalil, 1999.)
a 3–4°C rise in the
next 100 yearsEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 54CONDITIONS 55
Also, global warming is not evenly
distributed over the surface of the
earth. Figure 2.27 shows the measuredglobal change in the trends of surfacetemperature over the 46 years from
1951 to 1997. Areas of North America (Alaska) and Asia experi-
enced rises of 1.5–2°C in that period, and these places are pre-dicted to continue experiencing the fastest warming in the ﬁrsthalf of the present century. In some regions the temperature has
apparently not changed (New York, for example) and should notchange greatly in the next 50 years. There are also some areas,notably Greenland and the northern Paciﬁc Ocean, where sur-face temperatures have fallen.
We have emphasized, too, that the distribution of many
organisms is determined by occasional extremes rather than by
average conditions. Computer modeled projections imply that
•• ••
Change in temperature (°C)
2000 1900 1880–0.4
18600.00.61.0
1920
Year0.8
0.4
0.2
–0.2
1980 1960 1940Figure 2.25 Global annual surface
temperature variations from 1860 to 1998.
The bars show departures from the meanat the end of the 19th century. The curveis a moving average obtained using a 
21-year ﬁlter. Mean global temperaturesare now higher than at any time since1400. (After Saunders, 1999.)
Global mean surface temperature
(°C above 1865 baseline)
2075 2000 19000
1875124
1950
Year3
1925 1975 2050 2025ObservationsExperimentsFigure 2.26 The rise in global mean
surface temperature projected by the 
global coupled model (i.e. both the oceansand the atmosphere are modeled) forclimate variability and change in use at the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory,Princeton, USA. Observed increases ingreenhouse gases are used for the period1865–1990 (and clearly the projectionsmatch closely the observed trend intemperature); thereafter, greenhouse gasesare assumed to increase at 1% per year.Since the model simulates the globalbehavior of the oceans and atmosphere,
the precise behavior depends on the initial state of the system. The three‘experiments’ were started from differentstates. (After Delworth et al. , 2002.)
the global
distribution ofclimate changeEIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 5556 CHAPTER 2
global climatic change will also bring greater variance in tem-
perature. Timmerman et al. (1999), for example, modeled the effect
of greenhouse warming on the ENSO (see Section 2.4.1). Theyfound that not only was the mean climate in the tropical Paciﬁcregion predicted to move towards that presently represented by
the (warmer) El Niño state, but that interannual variability wasalso predicted to increase and that variability was predicted to bemore skewed towards unusually cold events.
Global temperatures have changed
naturally in the past, as we have seen.We are currently approaching the endof one of the warming periods that
started around 20,000 years ago, during which global temperat-ures have risen by about 8°C. The greenhouse effect adds to global
warming at a time when temperatures are already higher thanthey have been for 400,000 years. Buried pollen gives us evidencethat North American forest boundaries have migrated north atrates of 100–500 m year
−1since the last ice age. However, this rate
of advance has not been fast enough to keep pace with postglacial
warming. The rate of warming forecast to result from the green-house effect is 50–100 times faster than postglacial warming.Thus, of all the types of environmental pollution caused byhuman activities, none may have such profound effects as global
warming. We must expect latitudinal and altitudinal changes to species’ distributions and widespread extinctions as ﬂoras andfaunas fail to track and keep up with the rate of change in globaltemperatures (Hughes, 2000). What is more, large tracts of land
over which vegetation might advance and retreat have beenfragmented in the process of civilization, putting major barriersin the way of vegetational advance. It will be very surprising ifmany species do not get lost on the journey.
Summary
A condition is an abiotic environmental factor that inﬂuences the
functioning of living organisms. For most, we can recognize anoptimum level at which an organism performs best. Ultimately,we should deﬁne ‘performs best’ from an evolutionary point ofview, but in practice we mostly measure the effect of conditions
on some key property like the activity of an enzyme or the rateof reproduction.
The ecological niche is not a place but a summary of an organ-
ism’s tolerances of conditions and requirements for resources. The
•• ••–2 –1.5 –1 –0.5 –0.3 –0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 1 1.5 2.8
Figure 2.27 Change in the surface temperature of the globe expressed as the linear trend over 46 years from 1951 to 1997. The bar below
gives the temperatures in °C. (From Hansen et al. , 1999.)
can the biota keep
up with the pace?EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 56CONDITIONS 57
modern concept – Hutchinson’s n-dimensional hypervolume – also
distinguishes fundamental and realized niches.
Temperature is discussed in detail as a typical, and perhaps the
most important, condition. Individuals respond to temperature
with impaired function and ultimately death at upper and lower
extremes, with a functional range between the extremes, within whichthere is an optimum, although these responses may be subject toevolutionary adaptation and to more immediate acclimatization.
The rates of biological enzymatic processes often increase
exponentially with temperature (often Q
10≈2), but for rates of
growth and development there are often only slight deviations
from linearity: the basis for the day-degree concept. Becausedevelopment usually increases more rapidly with temperature thandoes growth, ﬁnal size tends to decrease with rearing temperature.
Attempts to uncover universal rules of temperature dependenceremain a matter of controversy.
We explain the differences between endotherms and ecto-
therms but also the similarities between them, ultimately, intheir responses to a range of temperatures.
We examine variations in temperature on and within the sur-
face of the earth with a variety of causes: latitudinal, altitudinal,continental, seasonal, diurnal and microclimatic effects, and, insoil and water, the effects of depth. Increasingly, the importance
of medium-term temporal patterns have become apparent.Notable amongst these are the El Niño–Southern Oscillation(ENSO) and the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).There are very many examples of plant and animal distribu-
tions that are strikingly correlated with some aspect of environ-
mental temperature but these do not prove that temperaturedirectly causes the limits to a species’ distribution. The tem-peratures measured are only rarely those that the organismsexperience. For many species, distributions are accounted for not 
so much by average temperatures as by occasional extremes; and the effects of temperature may be determined largely by theresponses of other community members or by interactions withother conditions.
A range of other environmental conditions are also discussed:
the pH of soil and water, salinity, conditions at the boundarybetween sea and land, and the physical forces of winds, waves andcurrents. Hazards, disasters and catastrophes are distinguished.
A number of environmental conditions are becoming increas-
ingly important due to the accumulation of toxic by-products of
human activities. A striking example is the creation of ‘acid rain’.Another is the effect of industrial gases on the greenhouse effectand consequent effects on global warming. A projected rise of3–4°C in the next 100 years seems a reasonable value fromwhich to make projections of ecological effects, though globalwarming is not evenly distributed over the surface of the earth.This rate is 50–100 times faster than postglacial warming. We must
expect latitudinal and altitudinal changes to species’ distributionsand widespread extinctions of ﬂoras and faunas.
•• ••EIPC02  10/24/05  1:44 PM  Page 57••3.1 Introduction
According to Tilman (1982), all things
consumed by an organism are resourcesfor it. But consumed does not simply
mean ‘eaten’. Bees and squirrels do not eat holes, but a hole thatis occupied is no longer available to another bee or squirrel, just
as an atom of nitrogen, a sip of nectar or a mouthful of acorn areno longer available to other consumers. Similarly, females thathave already mated may be unavailable to other mates. All thesethings have been consumed in the sense that the stock or supplyhas been reduced. Thus, resources are entities required by an organ-ism, the quantities of which can be reduced by the activity of theorganism.
Green plants photosynthesize and
obtain both energy and matter for
growth and reproduction from inorganicmaterials. Their resources are solarradiation, carbon dioxide (CO
2), water
and mineral nutrients. ‘Chemosynthetic’ organisms, such as many
of the Archaebacteria, obtain energy by oxidizing methane,ammonium ions, hydrogen sulﬁde or ferrous iron; they live inenvironments such as hot springs and deep sea vents and use
resources that were much more abundant during early phases oflife on earth. All other organisms use as their food resource thebodies of other organisms. In each case, what has been consumedis no longer available to another consumer. The rabbit eaten byan eagle is no longer available to another eagle. The quantum ofsolar radiation absorbed and photosynthesized by a leaf is no longeravailable to another leaf. This has an important consequence: organ-isms may compete with each other to capture a share of a limited
resource – a topic that will occupy us in Chapter 5.
A large part of ecology is about the assembly of inorganic
resources by green plants and the reassembly of these packages
at each successive stage in a web of consumer–resource inter-actions. In this chapter we start with the resources of plants and focus especially on those most important in photosynthesis: radiation and CO
2. Together, plant resources fuel the growth 
of individual plants, which, collectively, determine the primary 
productivity of whole areas of land (or volumes of water): the rate,
per unit area, at which plants produce biomass. Patterns of prim-
ary productivity are examined in Chapter 17. Relatively little space
in this chapter is given to food as a resource for animals, simplybecause a series of later chapters (9–12) is devoted to the ecologyof predators, grazers, parasites and saprotrophs (the consumersand decomposers of dead organisms). This chapter then closeswhere the previous chapter began: with the ecological niche, addingresource dimensions to the condition dimensions we have metalready.
3.2 Radiation
Solar radiation is the only source of energy that can be used in
metabolic activities by green plants. It comes to the plant as a ﬂuxof radiation from the sun, either directly having been diffused toa greater or lesser extent by the atmosphere, or after beingreﬂected or transmitted by other objects. The direct fraction is
highest at low latitudes (Figure 3.1). Moreover, for much of theyear in temperate climates, and for the whole of the year in aridclimates, the leaf canopy in terrestrial communities does notcover the land surface, so that most of the incident radiation fallson bare branches or on bare ground.
When a plant intercepts radiant
energy it may be reﬂected (with itswavelength unchanged), transmitted (after some wavebandshave been ﬁltered out) or absorbed. Part of the fraction that is
absorbed may raise the plant’s temperature and be reradiated atmuch longer wavelengths; in terrestrial plants, part may contributelatent heat of evaporation of water and so power the transpirationwhat are resources?
organisms may
compete forresources
the fate of radiation
Chapter 3
Resources
EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 58RESOURCES 59
stream. A small part may reach the chloroplasts and drive the 
process of photosynthesis (Figure 3.2).
Radiant energy is converted during
photosynthesis into energy-rich chem-ical compounds of carbon, which will
subsequently be broken down in re-spiration (either by the plant itself or 
by organisms that consume it). But unless the radiation is cap-tured and chemically ﬁxed at the instant it falls on the leaf, it isirretrievably lost for photosynthesis. Radiant energy that hasbeen ﬁxed in photosynthesis passes just once through the world.This is in complete contrast to an atom of nitrogen or carbon ora molecule of water that may cycle repeatedly through endlessgenerations of organisms.
Solar radiation is a resource con-
tinuum: a spectrum of different wave-
lengths. But the photosynthetic apparatusis able to gain access to energy in only
a restricted band of this spectrum. All green plants depend onchlorophyll and other pigments for the photosynthetic ﬁxation ofcarbon, and these pigments ﬁx radiation in a waveband betweenroughly 400 and 700 nm. This is the band of ‘photosyntheticallyactive radiation’ (PAR). It corresponds broadly with the range ofthe spectrum visible to the human eye that we call ‘light’. About56% of the radiation incident on the earth’s surface lies outsidethe PAR range and is thus unavailable as a resource for green plants.In other organisms there are pigments, for example bacterio-
chlorophyll in bacteria, that operate in photosynthesis outside thePAR range of green plants.3.2.1 Variations in the intensity and quality 
of radiation
A major reason why plants seldom
achieve their intrinsic photosyntheticcapacity is that the intensity of radiationvaries continually (Figure 3.3). Plantmorphology and physiology that are optimal for photosynthesis
at one intensity of radiation will usually be inappropriate atanother. In terrestrial habitats, leaves live in a radiation regimethat varies throughout the day and the year, and they live in an environment of other leaves that modiﬁes the quantity and quality of radiation received. As with all resources, the supply of radiation can vary both systematically (diurnal, annual) and unsystematically. Moreover, it is not the case simply that the inten-sity of radiation is a greater or lesser proportion of a maximumvalue at which photosynthesis would be most productive. At high
intensities, photoinhibition of photosynthesis may occur (Long 
et al. , 1994), such that the rate of ﬁxation of carbon decreases 
with increasing radiation intensity. High intensities of radiationmay also lead to dangerous overheating of plants. Radiation is anessential resource for plants, but they can have too much as wellas too little.
Annual and diurnal rhythms are
systematic variations in solar radiation(Figure 3.3a, b). The green plant expe-riences periods of famine and glut in its radiation resource every24 h (except near the poles) and seasons of famine and glut everyyear (except in the tropics). In aquatic habitats, an additional 
••radiant energy must
be captured or is lostforever
photosyntheticallyactive radiation2.1
2.11.68
1.68
1.68
1.68
1.26
0.842.12.1
1.68 1.68
1.68
1.682.11.681.260.840.84
1.26
2.1
1.68
1.261.68
2.12.1
2.1
1.68
0.84Figure 3.1 Global map of the solar
radiation absorbed annually in the earth–
atmosphere system: from data obtainedwith a radiometer on the Nimbus 3meteorological satellite. The units are 
Jc m
−2min−1. (After Raushke et al. , 1973.)
photoinhibition at
high intensities
systematic variationsin supplyEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 59••60 CHAPTER 3
systematic and predictable source of variation in radiation inten-
sity is the reduction in intensity with depth in the water column(Figure 3.3c), though the extent of this may vary greatly. For exam-ple, differences in water clarity mean that seagrasses may growon solid substrates as much as 90 m below the surface in the rel-
atively unproductive open ocean, whereas macrophytes in freshwaters rarely grow at depths below 10 m (Sorrell et al. , 2001), andoften only at considerably shallower locations, in large part because
of differences in concentrations of suspended particles and alsophytoplankton (see below).
The way in which an organism reacts to systematic, predict-
able variation in the supply of a resource reﬂects both its present
physiology and its past evolution. The seasonal shedding of leaves
by deciduous trees in temperate regions in part reﬂects the annual
••
(a) (b)
(c) (d)R10
100%
100%100%79
2R6R7
47
5
1921227R12
100%
58
28
2
31
24
21
10
7
Figure 3.2 The reﬂection (R) and attenuation of solar radiation falling on various plant communities. The arrows show the percentage 
of incident radiation reaching various levels in the vegetation. (a) A boreal forest of mixed birch and spruce; (b) a pine fore st; (c) a ﬁeld of
sunﬂowers; and (d) a ﬁeld of corn (maize). These ﬁgures represent data obtained in particular communities and great variation w ill occur
depending on the stage of growth of the forest or crop canopy, and on the time of day and season at which the measurements are taken.
(After Larcher, 1980, and other sources.)EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 60•• ••(b)  Diurnal cycles
05Poona (India) 18 °31′ N
05
20 124 20 124 20 124 20 124 20 124 20 124 20 124 20 124 20 124 20 124 20 124 20 124
Time (h)Bergen (Norway) 60 °22′ N05Coimbra (Portugal) 40 °12′ NJan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov DecMonthly average of daily radiation (J cm–2 min–1)D0J50010002000
1500
NOSAJJMAMFKabanyolo
AveragePerfectly clearSolar radiation received (J cm–2 day–1)
D0J500100020001500
NOSAJJMAMFWageningen
AverageClearPerfectly
clear(a)  Annual cycles
Irradiance (% of subsurface value)100 (c)
020406080
10 0123456789
Depth (m)
Figure 3.3 (a) The daily totals of solar radiation received throughout the year at Wageningen (the Netherlands) and Kabanyolo (Uganda).
(b) The monthly average of daily radiation recorded at Poona (India), Coimbra (Portugal) and Bergen (Norway). ((a, b) after de Wit, 1965,
and other sources.) (c) Exponential diminution of radiation intensity in a freshwater habitat (Burrinjuck Dam, Australia). (Aft er Kirk, 1994.)EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 6162 CHAPTER 3
rhythm in the intensity of radiation – they are shed when they
are least useful. In consequence, an evergreen leaf of an under-story species may experience a further systematic change, becausethe seasonal cycle of leaf production of overstory species deter-mines what radiation remains to penetrate to the understory. The
daily movement of leaves in many species also reﬂects thechanging intensity and direction of incident radiation.
Less systematic variations in the
radiation environment of a leaf arecaused by the nature and position ofneighboring leaves. Each canopy, each
plant and each leaf, by intercepting radiation, creates a resource-depletion zone (RDZ) – a moving band of shadow over other leavesof the same plant, or of others. Deep in a canopy, shadows
become less well deﬁned because much of the radiation loses itsoriginal direction by diffusion and reﬂection.
Submerged vegetation in aquatic
habitats is likely to have a much less sys-tematic shading effect, simply becauseit is moved around by the ﬂow of thewater in which it lives, though vegeta-tion ﬂoating on the surface, especially
of ponds or lake, inevitably has a profound and largely unvary-ing effect on the radiation regime beneath it. Phytoplankton cellsnearer the surface, too, shade the cells beneath them, such thatthe reduction of intensity with depth is greater, the greater thephytoplankton density. Figure 3.4, for example, shows the decline
in light penetration, measured at a set depth in a laboratory system,as a population of the unicellular green alga, Chlorella vulgaris , built
up over a 12-day period (Huisman, 1999).The composition of radiation that 
has passed through leaves in a canopy,
or through a body of water, is alsoaltered. It may be less useful photo-synthetically because the PAR component has been reduced –though such reductions may also, of course, prevent photo-inhibition and overheating. Figure 3.5 shows an example for the variation with depth in a freshwater habitat.
The major differences amongst ter-
restrial species in their reaction to sys-
tematic variations in the intensity ofradiation are those that have evolvedbetween ‘sun species’ and ‘shade species’. In general, plantspecies that are characteristic of shaded habitats use radiation atlow intensities more efﬁciently than sun species, but the reverseis true at high intensities (Figure 3.6). Part of the differencebetween them lies in the physiology of the leaves, but the mor-phology of the plants also inﬂuences the efﬁciency with whichradiation is captured. The leaves of sun plants are commonlyexposed at acute angles to the midday sun (Poulson & DeLucia,1993). This spreads an incident beam of radiation over a larger
leaf area, and effectively reduces its intensity. An intensity of radiation that is superoptimal for photosynthesis when it strikesa leaf at 90° may therefore be optimal for a leaf inclined at anacute angle. The leaves of sun plants are often superimposed into
•• ••shade: a resource-
depletion zone
attenuation withdepth, and planktondensity, in aquatichabitatsvariations in qualityas well as quantity
sun and shadespecies20 60
40
20
015
10
5
0
Time (days)24 20 16 12 8 4 0Population density (cells ml–1) × 10–6
Light penetration (µmol photons m–2 s–1)
Figure 3.4 As population density ( /H17033) of the unicellular green
alga, Chlorella vulgaris , increased in laboratory culture, this
increased density reduced the penetration of light ( 7; its intensity
at a set depth). Bars are standard deviations; they are omitted
when they are smaller than the symbols. (After Huisman, 1999.)
Quantum irradiance
(1015 quanta m–2 s–1 nm–1)5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
Wavelength (nm)750 700 650 600 550 500 450 4000 m
5 m (×25)
3 m
Figure 3.5 Changing spectral distribution of radiation with depth
in Lake Burley Grifﬁn, Australia. Note that photosynthetically
active radiation lies broadly within the range 400–700 nm. (After Kirk, 1994.)EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 62RESOURCES 63
a multilayered canopy. In bright sunshine even the shaded leaves
in lower layers may have positive rates of net photosynthesis. Shadeplants commonly have leaves held near to the horizontal and ina single-layered canopy.
In contrast to these ‘strategic’ dif-
ferences, it may also happen that as a
plant grows, its leaves develop differently
as a ‘tactical’ response to the radiation environment in which itdeveloped. This often leads to the formation of ‘sun leaves’ and‘shade leaves’ within the canopy of a single plant. Sun leaves aretypically smaller, thicker, have more cells per unit area, denserveins, more densely packed chloroplasts and a greater dryweight per unit area of leaf. These tactical maneuvers, then, tendto occur not at the level of the whole plant, but at the level of
the individual leaf or even its parts. Nevertheless, they take time.To form sun or shade leaves as a tactical response, the plant, itsbud or the developing leaf must sense the leaf’s environment andrespond by growing a leaf with an appropriate structure. For exam-ple, it is impossible for the plant to change its form fast enoughto track the changes in intensity of radiation between a cloudyand a clear day. It can, however, change its rate of photosyn-thesis extremely rapidly, reacting even to the passing of a ﬂeckof sunlight. The rate at which a leaf photosynthesizes alsodepends on the demands that are made on it by other vigorously growing parts. Photosynthesis may be reduced, even thoughconditions are otherwise ideal, if there is no demanding call onits products.In aquatic habitats, much of the
variation between species is accountedfor by differences in photosyntheticpigments, which contribute signiﬁcantly to the precise wave-lengths of radiation that can be utilized (Kirk, 1994). Of the threetypes of pigment – chlorophylls, carotenoids and biliproteins – allphotosynthetic plants contain the ﬁrst two, but many algae alsocontain biliproteins; and within the chlorophylls, all higher plantshave chlorophyll aand b, but many algae have only chlorophyll
aand some have chlorophyll aand c. Examples of the absorp-
tion spectra of a number of pigments, the related contrasting absorption spectra of a number of groups of aquatic plants, andthe related distributional differences (with depth) between a
number of groups of aquatic plants are illustrated in Figure 3.7.A detailed assessment of the evidence for direct links between pigments, performance and distribution is given by Kirk (1994).
3.2.2 Net photosynthesis
The rate of photosynthesis is a gross measure of the rate at which
a plant captures radiant energy and ﬁxes it in organic carbon compounds. However, it is often more important to consider, andvery much easier to measure, the net gain. Net photosynthesisis the increase (or decrease) in dry matter that results from the
difference between gross photosynthesis and the losses due to respiration and the death of plant parts (Figure 3.8).
Net photosynthesis is negative in
darkness, when respiration exceedsphotosynthesis, and increases with theintensity of PAR. The compensation point
is the intensity of PAR at which the gain from gross photosyn-thesis exactly balances the respiratory and other losses. The leavesof shade species tend to respire at lower rates than those of sun
species. Thus, when both are growing in the shade the net photo-synthesis of shade species is greater than that of sun species.
There is nearly a 100-fold variation
in the photosynthetic capacity of leaves
(Mooney & Gulmon, 1979). This is therate of photosynthesis when incidentradiation is saturating, temperature is optimal, relative humidityis high, and CO
2and oxygen concentrations are normal. When
the leaves of different species are compared under these ideal 
conditions, the ones with the highest photosynthetic capacity aregenerally those from environments where nutrients, water andradiation are seldom limiting (at least during the growing season).
These include many agricultural crops and their weeds. Speciesfrom resource-poor environments (e.g. shade plants, desertperennials, heathland species) usually have low photosyntheticcapacity – even when abundant resources are provided. Such pat-terns can be understood by noting that photosynthetic capacity,like all capacity, must be ‘built’; and the investment in building
•• ••
CO2 uptake (mg CO2 dm–2 h–1)
0
0304050
Radiation intensity (100 J m–2 s–1)9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 120
10C4
C3
Shade herbs
Shade mosses,
planktonic algaeBeechSunherbsWheatCornSorghum
10
Figure 3.6 The response of photosynthesis to light intensity 
in various plants at optimal temperatures and with a natural
supply of CO2. Note that corn and sorghum are C4plants and 
the remainder are C3(the terms are explained in Sections 3.3.1 
and 3.3.2). (After Larcher, 1980, and other sources.)
sun and shade leavesthe compensation
point
photosyntheticcapacitypigment variation inaquatic speciesEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 63•• ••64 CHAPTER 3
AbsorbanceMacrophyte
7500.01.0
Wavelength (nm)600 500 4000.8
0.6
0.40.2
700 650 550 450(e)
Absorbance(d)
7000.00.9
300
Wavelength (nm)600 500 4000.8
0.70.60.50.40.3
0.20.1R-phycocyanin(b)Absorbance
700 550 4500.000.751.00
450
Wavelength (nm)650 6000.25449
5000.50
628Chlorophyll c2Absorbanceβ-carotene
5500.02.02.5
400
Wavelength (nm)5001.0
4501.5
0.5(c)
AbsorbanceGreen algae (f)
(arbitrary units)
750
Wavelength (nm)600 500 400 700 650 550 450 (a)Absorbance
700 550 4500.01.01.5
500 650 6000.5Chlorophyll b
Chlorophyll aChlorophyll a and b
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 3.7 (a) Absorption spectra of chlorophylls aand b. (b) Absorption spectrum of chlorophyll c2. (c) Absorption spectrum of 
β-carotene. (d) Absorption spectrum of the biliprotein, R-phycocyanin. (e) Absorption spectrum of a piece of leaf of the freshwa ter
macrophyte, Vallisneria spiralis , from Lake Ginnindera, Australia. (f ) Absorption spectrum of the planktonic alga Chlorella pyrenoidos
(green).EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 64•• ••RESOURCES 65AbsorbanceBlue-green algae
750
Wavelength (nm)600 500 400 700 650 550 450AbsorbanceDiatoms
(h)(g)
(arbitrary units) (arbitrary units)
Number of species(i)
30005060
10
Depth (m)3040
20
10Red
Brown
GreenWest Scotland
Figure 3.7 (continued) (g–h) Absorption spectra of the planktonic algae Navicula minima (diatom) and Synechocystis sp. (blue-green). 
(i) The numbers of species of benthic red, green and brown algae at various depths (and in various light regimes) off the west coast of
Scotland (56–57°N). (After Kirk, 1994; data from various sources.)
Daily photon flux (Einstein m–2 day–1)
D J M0A204050
J
Month(a)
1030
ASON
Photosynthetic capacity (µmol  m–2 s–1)
015
10
5
Daily CO2 exchange (g m–2 day–1)
D J M–5A51520
J
Month(b)
010
ASON
Figure 3.8 The annual course of events that determined the net photosynthetic rate of the foliage of maple ( Acer campestre ) in 1980. 
(a) Variations in the intensity of PAR ( /H17033), and changes in the photosynthetic capacity of the foliage ( 4) appearing in spring, rising to a
plateau and then declining through late September and October. (b) The daily ﬁxation of carbon dioxide (CO2) (7) and its loss through
respiration during the night ( /H17033). The annual total gross photosynthesis was 1342 g CO2m−2and night respiration was 150 g CO2m−2, 
giving a balance of 1192 g CO2m−2net photosynthesis. (After Pearcy et al. , 1987.)EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 6566 CHAPTER 3
capacity is only likely to be repaid if ample opportunity exists for
that capacity to be utilized.
Needless to say, ideal conditions in which plants may achieve
their photosynthetic capacity are rarely present outside a physio-logist’s controlled environment chamber. In practice, the rate at
which photosynthesis actually proceeds is limited by conditions(e.g. temperature) and by the availability of resources other thanradiant energy. Leaves seem also to achieve their maximal photosynthetic rate only when the products are being actively withdrawn (to developing buds, tubers, etc.). In addition, the photosynthetic capacity of leaves is highly correlated with leaf nitro-gen content, both between leaves on a single plant and betweenthe leaves of different species (Woodward, 1994). Around 75% of leaf nitrogen is invested in chloroplasts. This suggests that the
availability of nitrogen as a resource may place strict limits onthe ability of plants to garner CO
2and energy in photosynthesis.
The rate of photosynthesis also increases with the intensity of PAR,
but in most species (‘C3plants’ – see below) reaches a plateau at
intensities of radiation well below that of full solar radiation.
The highest efﬁciency of utilization of radiation by green plants
is 3–4.5%, obtained from cultured microalgae at low intensitiesof PAR. In tropical forests values fall within the range 1–3%, and
in temperate forests 0.6–1.2%. The approximate efﬁciency of tem-perate crops is only about 0.6%. It is on such levels of efﬁciencythat the energetics of all communities depend.
3.2.3 Sun and shade plants of an evergreen shrub
A number of the general points above are illustrated by a study
of the evergreen shrub, Heteromeles arbutifolia . This plant grows
both in chaparral habitats in California, where shoots in theupper crown are consistently exposed to full sunlight and hightemperatures, especially during the dry season, and also in
woodland habitats, where the plant grows both in open sites andin the shaded understory (Valladares & Pearcy, 1998). Shadeplants from the understory were compared with sun plants fromthe chaparral, where they received around seven times as muchradiation (‘photon ﬂux density’, PFD). Compared to those fromthe shade (Figure 3.9 and Table 3.1a), sun plants had leaves thatwere inclined at a much steeper angle to the horizontal, weresmaller but thicker, and were borne on shoots that were them-selves shorter (smaller internode distances). The sun leaves also
had a greater photosynthetic capacity (more chlorophyll andnitrogen) per unit leaf area but not per unit biomass.
The ‘architectural’ consequences of these differences (Table 3.1b)
were ﬁrst that shade plants had a much greater ‘projectionefﬁciency’ in the summer, but a much lower efﬁciency in the winter. Projection efﬁciency expresses the degree to which theeffective leaf area is reduced by being borne at an angle other thanright angles to the incident radiation. Thus, the more angled leavesof sun plants absorbed the direct rays of the overhead summersun over a wider leaf area than the more horizontal shade plant
leaves, but the more sidewards rays of the winter sun struck thesun plant leaves at closer to a right angle. Furthermore, these pro-jection efﬁciencies can themselves be modiﬁed by the fraction ofleaf area subject to self-shading, giving rise to ‘display efﬁciencies’.These were higher in shade than in sun plants, in the summerbecause of the higher projection efﬁciency, but in the winter becauseof the relative absence of self-shading in shade plants.
Whole plant physiological properties (Table 3.1b), then, reﬂect
both plant architecture and the morphologies and physiologies
of individual leaves. The efﬁciency of light absorption, like displayefﬁciency, reﬂects both leaf angles and self-shading. Hence, absorp-tion efﬁciency was consistently higher for shade than for sun plants,though the efﬁciency for sun plants was signiﬁcantly higher in winter compared to summer. The effective leaf ratio (the lightabsorption efﬁciency per unit of biomass) was then massivelygreater for shade than for sun plants (as a result of their thinnerleaves), though again, somewhat higher for the latter in winter.
•• ••(a) (c)
(b) (d)
Figure 3.9 Computer reconstructions of stems of typical sun 
(a, c) and shade (b, d) plants of the evergreen shrub Heteromeles
arbutifolia , viewed along the path of the sun’s rays in the early
morning (a, b) and at midday (c, d). Darker tones represent parts
of leaves shaded by other leaves of the same plant. Bars =4 cm.
(After Valladares & Pearcy, 1998.)EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 66RESOURCES 67
Overall, therefore, despite receiving only one-seventh of the
PFD of sun plants, shade plants reduced the differential in the
amount absorbed to one-quarter, and reduced the differential in their daily rate of carbon gain to only a half. Shade plants successfully counterbalanced their reduced photosynthetic capa-
city at the leaf level with enhanced light-harvesting ability at the whole plant level. The sun plants can be seen as striking acompromise between maximizing whole plant photosynthesis on the one hand while avoiding photoinhibition and overheatingof individual leaves on the other.
3.2.4 Photosynthesis or water conservation? Strategic
and tactical solutions
In fact, in terrestrial habitats especially,
it is not sensible to consider radiation
as a resource independently of water. Intercepted radiation doesnot result in photosynthesis unless there is CO
2available, and theprime route of entry of CO2is through open stomata. But if the
stomata are open to the air, water will evaporate through them.If water is lost faster than it can be gained, the leaf (and the plant)will sooner or later wilt and eventually die. But in most terres-trial communities, water is, at least sometimes, in short supply.
Should a plant conserve water at the expense of present photo-synthesis, or maximize photosynthesis at the risk of running out of water? Once again, we meet the problem of whether theoptimal solution involves a strict strategy or the ability to maketactical responses. There are good examples of both solutions andalso compromises.
Perhaps the most obvious strategy
that plants may adopt is to have ashort life and high photosynthetic
activity during periods when water isabundant, but remain dormant asseeds during the rest of the year, neither photosynthesizing nortranspiring (e.g. many desert annuals, annual weeds and mostannual crop plants).
•• ••Table 3.1 (a) Observed differences in the shoots and leaves of sun and shade plants of the shrub Heteromeles arbutifolia . Standard
deviations are given in parentheses; the signiﬁcance of differences are given following analysis of variance. (b) Consequent wh ole plant
properties of sun and shade plants. (After Valladares & Pearcy, 1998.)
(a)
Sun Shade P
Internode distance (cm) 1.08 (0.06) 1.65 (0.02) <0.05
Leaf angle (degrees) 71.3 (16.3) 5.3 (4.3) <0.01
Leaf surface area (cm2) 10.1 (0.3) 21.4 (0.8) <0.01
Leaf blade thickness ( mm) 462.5 (10.9) 292.4 (9.5) <0.01
Photosynthetic capacity, area basis ( mmol CO2m−2s−1) 14.1 (2.0) 9.0 (1.7) <0.01
Photosynthetic capacity, mass basis ( mmol CO2kg−1s−1) 60.8 (10.1) 58.1 (11.2) NS
Chlorophyll content, area basis (mg m−2) 280.5 (15.3) 226.7 (14.0) <0.01
Chlorophyll content, mass basis (mg g−1) 1.23 (0.04) 1.49 (0.03) <0.05
Leaf nitrogen content, area basis (g m−2) 1.97 (0.25) 1.71 (0.21) <0.05
Leaf nitrogen content, mass basis (% dry weight) 0.91 (0.31) 0.96 (0.30) NS
(b)
Sun plants Shade plants
Summer Winter Summer Winter
EP 0.55a0.80b0.88b0.54a
ED 0.33a0.38a, b0.41b0.43b
Fraction self-shaded 0.22a0.42b0.47b0.11a
EA, direct PFD 0.28a0.44b0.55c0.53c
LARc(cm2g−1) 7.1a11.7b20.5c19.7c
EP, projection efﬁciency; ED, display efﬁciency; EA, absorption efﬁciency; LARe, effective leaf area ratio; NS, not signiﬁcant. 
Letter codes indicate groups that differed signiﬁcantly in analyses of variance ( P<0.05).
stomatal openingshort active
interludes in adormant lifeEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 6768 CHAPTER 3
Second, plants with long lives 
may produce leaves during periods
when water is abundant and shed
them during droughts (e.g. many species of Acacia ). Some shrubs
of the Israeli desert (e.g. Teucrium polium ) bear ﬁnely divided, thin-
cuticled leaves during the season when soil water is freely avail-
able. These are then replaced by undivided, small, thick-cuticledleaves in more drought-prone seasons, which in turn fall and may leave only green spines or thorns (Orshan, 1963): a sequentialpolymorphism through the season, with each leaf morph beingreplaced in turn by a less photosynthetically active but more water-tight structure.
Next, leaves may be produced that are long lived, transpire
only slowly and tolerate a water deﬁcit, but which are unable 
to photosynthesize rapidly even when water is abundant (e.g. evergreen desert shrubs). Structural features such as hairs, sunkenstomata and the restriction of stomata to specialized areas on the lower surface of a leaf slow down water loss. But these samemorphological features reduce the rate of entry of CO
2. Waxy and
hairy leaf surfaces may, however, reﬂect a greater proportion 
of radiation that is not in the PAR range and so keep the leaf temperature down and reduce water loss.
Finally, some groups of plants have
evolved particular physiologies: C
4and
crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM).We consider these in more detail in
Sections 3.3.1–3.3.3. Here, we simply note that plants with ‘nor-mal’ (i.e. C
3) photosynthesis are wasteful of water compared
with plants that possess the modiﬁed C4and CAM physiologies.
The water-use efﬁciency of C4plants (the amount of carbonﬁxed per unit of water transpired) may
be double that of C3plants.
The viability of alternative strat-
egies to solve a common problem is
nicely illustrated by the trees of seasonally dry tropical forests and woodlands (Eamus, 1999). These communities are found 
naturally in Africa, the Americas, Australia and India, and as a result of human interference elsewhere in Asia. But whereas, for example, the savannas of Africa and India are dominated by deciduous species, and the Llanos of South America are dominated by evergreens, the savannas of Australia are occu-pied by roughly equal numbers of species from four groups(Figure 3.10a): evergreens (a full canopy all year), deciduousspecies (losing all leaves for at least 1 and usually 2–4 months eachyear), semideciduous species (losing around 50% or more of their
leaves each year) and brevideciduous species (losing only about20% of their leaves). At the ends of this continuum, the decidu-ous species avoid drought in the dry season (April–November in Australia) as a result of their vastly reduced rates of transpir-ation (Figure 3.10b), but the evergreens maintain a positive carbon balance throughout the year (Figure 3.10c), whereas thedeciduous species make no net photosynthate at all for around 3 months.
The major tactical control of the rates of both photosynthe-
sis and water loss is through changes in stomatal ‘conductance’that may occur rapidly during the course of a day and allow avery rapid response to immediate water shortages. Rhythms ofstomatal opening and closure may ensure that the above-ground
parts of the plant remain more or less watertight except duringcontrolled periods of active photosynthesis. These rhythms may
•• ••Percentage canopy fullness
J0J2060100
Month(a)
4080
FMAMJ JASOND
Predawn water potential MPa)
J–2.0J0.0
Month(b)
–1.0–0.5
FMAMJ JASOND–1.5
Assimilation rate (µmol m–2 s–1)
J0J21216
Month(c)
1014
FMAMJ JASOND468
Figure 3.10 (a) Percentage canopy fullness for deciduous ( /H17004), semideciduous ( /H17039), brevideciduous ( /H17010) and evergreen ( /H17033) trees Australian
savannas throughout the year. (Note that the southern hemisphere dry season runs from around April to November.) (b) Susceptibi lity 
to drought as measured by increasingly negative values of ‘predawn water potential’ for deciduous ( /H17004) and evergreen ( /H17033) trees. (c) Net
photosynthesis as measured by the carbon assimilation rate for deciduous ( /H17004) and evergreen ( /H17033) trees. (After Eamus, 1999.)leaf appearance and
structure
physiologicalstrategiescoexisting alternativestrategies inAustralian savannasEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 68RESOURCES 69
be diurnal or may be quickly responsive to the plant’s internal
water status. Stomatal movement may even be triggered directlyby conditions at the leaf surface itself – the plant then respondsto desiccating conditions at the very site, and at the same time,as the conditions are ﬁrst sensed.
3.3 Carbon dioxide
The CO2used in photosynthesis is
obtained almost entirely from the atmo-
sphere, where its concentration has risen from approximately 280µll
−1in 1750 to about 370 µll−1today and is still increasing
by 0.4–0.5% year−1(see Figure 18.22). In a terrestrial community,
the ﬂux of CO2at night is upwards, from the soil and vegetation
to the atmosphere; on sunny days above a photosynthesizingcanopy, there is a downward ﬂux.
Above a vegetation canopy, the air
becomes rapidly mixed. However, the
situation is quite different within andbeneath canopies. Changes in CO
2con-
centration in the air within a mixed deciduous forest in New
England were measured at various heights above ground levelduring the year (Figure 3.11a) (Bazzaz & Williams, 1991). Highestconcentrations, up to around 1800 µll
−1, were measured near thesurface of the ground, tapering off to around 400 µll−1at 1 m above
the ground. These high values near ground level were achievedin the summer when high temperatures allowed the rapiddecomposition of litter and soil organic matter. At greaterheights within the forest, the CO
2concentrations scarcely ever
(even in winter) reached the value of 370 µll−1which is the
atmospheric concentration of bulk air measured at the Mauna Loa laboratory in Hawaii (see Figure 18.22). During the wintermonths, concentrations remained virtually constant through theday and night at all heights. But in the summer, major diurnal
cycles of concentration developed that reﬂected the interactionbetween the production of CO
2by decomposition and its con-
sumption in photosynthesis (Figure 3.11b).
That CO2concentrations vary so widely within vegetation
means that plants growing in different parts of a forest will 
experience quite different CO2environments. Indeed the lower
leaves on a forest shrub will usually experience higher CO2
concentrations than its upper leaves, and seedlings will live in environments richer in CO
2than mature trees.
In aquatic environments, variations
in CO2concentration can be just as
striking, especially when water mixingis limited, for example during the sum-mer ‘stratiﬁcation’ of lakes, with layers of warm water towardsthe surface and colder layers beneath (Figure 3.12).
•• ••
CO2 concentrations (µl l–1)
Dec 31 Nov 11 Apr 25 Mar 6440
Sep 22
Measurement date(a)
420
400
380360
340
320300
Jun 14 Aug 3
Time of day0400255455
405
355305
2000 1200Jul 4CO2 concentrations (µl l–1)
0400255(b)
455
405355305
2000 1200Nov 21
Figure 3.11 (a) CO2 concentrations in a
mixed deciduous forest (Harvard Forest,
Massachusetts, USA) at various times of year at ﬁve heights above ground: 
/H17009, 0.05 m; 4, 0.20 m; /H17039, 3.00 m; 7, 6.00 m; 
/H17033, 12.00 m. Data from the Mauna Loa CO2
observatory ( 5) are given on the same axis
for comparison. (b) CO2 concentrations 
for each hour of the day (averaged over3–7-day periods) on November 21 and July4. (After Bazzaz & Williams, 1991.)the rise in global levels
variations beneath a
canopy
variations in aquatichabitats . . .EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 6970 CHAPTER 3
Also, in aquatic habitats, dissolved
CO2tends to react with water to form
carbonic acid, which in turn ionizes,
and these tendencies increase with pH,
such that 50% or more of inorganic carbon in water may be inthe form of bicarbonate ions. Many aquatic plants can utilize car-
bon in this form, but since it must ultimately be reconverted toCO
2for photosynthesis, this is likely to be less useful as a source
of inorganic carbon, and in practice, many plants will be limited
in their photosynthetic rate by the availability of CO2. Figure 3.13,
for example, shows the response of the moss, Sphagnum subse-
cundum , taken from two depths in a Danish lake, to increases in
CO2concentration. At the time they were sampled ( July 1995),
the natural concentrations in the waters from which they weretaken (Figure 3.12) were 5–10 times less than those eliciting maximum rates of photosynthesis. Even the much higher con-centrations that occurred at the lower depths during summer
stratiﬁcation would not have maximized photosynthetic rate.
One might expect a process as fundamental to life on earth as
carbon ﬁxation in photosynthesis to be underpinned by a singleunique biochemical pathway. In fact, there are three such pathways(and variants within them): the C
3pathway (the most common),
the C4pathway and CAM (crassulacean acid metabolism). Theecological consequences of the different pathways are profound,
especially as they affect the reconciliation of photosyntheticactivity and controlled water loss (see Section 3.2.4). Even in aquaticplants, where water conservation is not normally an issue, andmost plants use the C
3pathway, there are many CO2-concentrating
mechanisms that serve to enhance the effectiveness of CO2uti-
lization (Badger et al. , 1997).
3.3.1 The C3pathway
In this, the Calvin–Benson cycle, CO2is ﬁxed into a three-carbon
acid (phosphoglyceric acid) by the enzyme Rubisco, which is 
present in massive amounts in the leaves (25–30% of the total leaf nitrogen). This same enzyme can also act as an oxygenase,and this activity (photorespiration) can result in a wasteful
release of CO
2– reducing by about one-third the net amounts of
CO2that are ﬁxed. Photorespiration increases with temperature
with the consequence that the overall efﬁciency of carbon ﬁxation
declines with increasing temperature.
•• ••. . . setting a limit on
photosynthetic ratesJulyAugustCO2 concentration (µmol l–1)
1100180
Depth (m)123456789 1 0170
160150140130120
110
100
90
807060
50403020
10190200210
Figure 3.12 Variation in CO2 concentration with depth in Lake
Grane Langsø, Denmark in early July and again in late August
after the lake becomes stratiﬁed with little mixing between thewarm water at the surface and the colder water beneath. (AfterRiis & Sand-Jensen, 1997.)
Photosynthetic rate (mg O2 g–1 DW h–1)
400 300 100–202610
200
Concentration of CO2 (µmol l–1)048
Figure 3.13 The increase (to a plateau) in photosynthetic 
rate with artiﬁcially manipulated CO2concentrations in moss,
Sphagnum subsecundum , taken from depths of 9.5 m ( /H17033) and 
0.7 m ( 7) in Lake Grane Langsø, Denmark, in early July. These
concentrations – and hence the rates of photosynthesis – are much
higher than those occurring naturally (see Figure 3.12). (After Riis& Sand-Jensen, 1997.)EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 70RESOURCES 71
The rate of photosynthesis of C3plants increases with the inten-
sity of radiation, but reaches a plateau. In many species, particu-
larly shade species, this plateau occurs at radiation intensities farbelow that of full solar radiation (see Figure 3.6). Plants with C
3
metabolism have low water-use efﬁciency compared with C4and
CAM plants (see below), mainly because in a C3plant, CO2dif-
fuses rather slowly into the leaf and so allows time for a lot ofwater vapor to diffuse out of it.
3.3.2 The C4pathway
In this, the Hatch–Slack cycle, the C3pathway is present but it is
conﬁned to cells deep in the body of the leaf. CO2that diffuses
into the leaves via the stomata meets mesophyll cells containingthe enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) carboxylase. This enzymecombines atmospheric CO
2with PEP to produce a four-carbon
acid. This diffuses, and releases CO2to the inner cells where it enters
the traditional C3pathway. PEP carboxylase has a much greater
afﬁnity than Rubisco for CO2. There are profound consequences.
First, C4plants can absorb atmospheric CO2much more
effectively than C3plants. As a result, C4plants may lose much
less water per unit of carbon ﬁxed. Furthermore, the wastefulrelease of CO
2by photorespiration is almost wholly prevented
and, as a consequence, the efﬁciency of the overall process of car-bon ﬁxation does not change with temperature. Finally, the con-centration of Rubisco in the leaves is a third to a sixth of that inC
3plants, and the leaf nitrogen content is correspondingly lower.
As a consequence of this, C4plants are much less attractive to
many herbivores and also achieve more photosynthesis per unitof nitrogen absorbed.
One might wonder how C
4plants, with such high water-use
efﬁciency, have failed to dominate the vegetation of the world,but there are clear costs to set against the gains. The C
4system
has a high light compensation point and is inefﬁcient at low lightintensities; C
4species are therefore ineffective as shade plants.
Moreover, C4plants have higher temperature optima for growth
than C3species: most C4plants are found in arid regions or the
tropics. In North America, C4dicotyledonous species appear to
be favored in sites of limited water supply (Figure 3.14) (Stowe& Teeri, 1978), whereas the abundance of C
4monocotyledonous
species is strongly correlated with maximum daily temperaturesduring the growing season (Teeri & Stowe, 1976). But these correlations are not universal. More generally, where there aremixed populations of C
3and C4plants, the proportion of C4
species tends to fall with elevation on mountain ranges, and inseasonal climates it is C
4species that tend to dominate the 
vegetation in the hot dry seasons and C3species in the cooler 
wetter seasons. The few C4species that extend into temperate
regions (e.g. Spartina spp.) are found in marine or other saline envir-
onments where osmotic conditions may especially favor specieswith efﬁcient water use.Perhaps the most remarkable feature of C
4plants is that 
they do not seem to use their high water-use efﬁciency in fastershoot growth, but instead devote a greater fraction of the plantbody to a well-developed root system. This is one of the hintsthat the rate of carbon assimilation is not the major limit to 
their growth, but that the shortage of water and/or nutrients matters more.
3.3.3 The CAM pathway
Plants with a crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) pathway also
use PEP carboxylase with its strong power of concentrating CO2.
In contrast to C3and C4plants, though, they open their stomata
and ﬁx CO2at night (as malic acid). During the daytime the 
stomata are closed and the CO2is released within the leaf and
ﬁxed by Rubisco. However, because the CO2is then at a high 
concentration within the leaf, photorespiration is prevented, justas it is in plants using the C
4pathway. Plants using the CAM 
photosynthetic pathway have obvious advantages when water is in short supply, because their stomata are closed during the daytime when evaporative forces are strongest. The system is nowknown in a wide variety of families, not just the Crassulaceae.
This appears to be a highly effective means of water conserva-tion, but CAM species have not come to inherit the earth. Onecost to CAM plants is the problem of storing the malic acid thatis formed at night: most CAM plants are succulents with extens-ive water-storage tissues that cope with this problem.
In general, CAM plants are found in arid environments where
strict stomatal control of daytime water is vital for survival(desert succulents) and where CO
2is in short supply during 
the daytime, for example in submerged aquatic plants, and in 
photosynthetic organs that lack stomata (e.g. the aerial photo-synthetic roots of orchids). In some CAM plants, such as Opuntia
basilaris , the stomata remain closed both day and night during
drought. The CAM process then simply allows the plant to ‘idle’
– photosynthesizing only the CO
2produced internally by respira-
tion (Szarek et al. , 1973).
A taxonomic and systematic survey of C3, C4and CAM photo-
synthetic systems is given by Ehleringer and Monson (1993).
They describe the very strong evidence that the C3pathway is
evolutionarily primitive and, very surprisingly, that the C4and CAM
systems must have arisen repeatedly and independently duringthe evolution of the plant kingdom.
3.3.4 The response of plants to changing atmospheric
concentrations of CO2
Of all the various resources required by plants, CO2is the only
one that is increasing on a global scale. This rise is strongly correlated with the increased rate of consumption of fossil fuels
•• ••EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 7172 CHAPTER 3
and the clearing of forests. As Loladze (2002) points out, while
consequential changes to global climate may be controversial insome quarters, marked increases in CO
2concentration itself are
not. Plants now are experiencing around a 30% higher concentra-tion compared to the pre-industrial period – effectively instantan-eous on geological timescales; trees living now may experiencea doubling in concentration over their lifetimes – effectively 
an instantaneous change on an evolutionary timescale; and high
mixing rates in the atmosphere mean that these are changes thatwill affect allplants.
There is also evidence of large-
scale changes in atmospheric CO
2
over much longer timescales. Carbon
balance models suggest that during theTriassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods, atmospheric concen-
trations of CO2were four to eight times greater than at present,
falling after the Cretaceous from between 1400 and 2800 µll−1to
below 1000 µll−1 in the Eocene, Miocene and Pliocene, and
ﬂuctuating between 180 and 280 µll−1 during subsequent glacial
and interglacial periods (Ehleringer & Monson, 1993).
The declines in CO2concentration in the atmosphere after the
Cretaceous may have been the primary force that favored the evo-
lution of plants with C4physiology (Ehleringer et al. , 1991),
because at low concentrations of CO2, photorespiration places C3
plants at a particular disadvantage. The steady rise in CO2since
the Industrial Revolution is therefore a partial return to pre-Pleistocene conditions and C
4plants may begin to lose some of
their advantage.
•• ••(a)
0.370.00
1.40
1.500.450.56
1.340.99
2.13 1.77
2.843.203.36
4.382.04
1.770.690.17
0.24
0.380.41
0.08 0.290.810.810.38
0.72
0.560.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.15
0.28
0.43
2.540.310.22
C4 species (%)
80 65 3502012
50
Mean summer pan evaporation
(inches per summer)(b)
4
3r = 0.947
Figure 3.14 (a) The percentage of native C4dicot species in various regions of North America. (b) The relationship between the
percentage of native C4species in 31 geographic regions of North America, and the mean summer (May–October) pan evaporation – 
a climatic indicator of plant/water balance. Regions for which appropriate climatic data were unavailable were excluded, togeth er with
south Florida, where the peculiar geography and climate may explain the aberrant composition of the ﬂora. (After Stowe & Teeri,  1978.)
changes in geological
timeEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 72RESOURCES 73
When other resources are present 
at adequate levels, additional CO2
scarcely inﬂuences the rate of photo-
synthesis of C4plants but increases the
rate of C3plants. Indeed, artiﬁcially increasing the CO2concen-
tration in greenhouses is a commercial technique to increase crop(C
3) yields. We might reasonably predict dramatic increases in 
the productivity of individual plants and of whole crops, forestsand natural communities as atmospheric concentrations of CO
2
continue to increase. In the 1990s alone, results from more than2700 studies on free-air CO
2enrichment (FACE) experiments
were published, and it is clear that, for example, doubling CO
2concentration generally stimulates photosynthesis and
increases agricultural yield by an average of 41% (Loladze, 2002).However, there is also much evidence that the responses may be complicated (Bazzaz, 1990). For example, when six species oftemperate forest tree were grown for 3 years in a CO
2-enriched
atmosphere in a glasshouse, they were generally larger than controls, but the CO
2enhancement of growth declined even
within the relatively short timescale of the experiment (Bazzazet al. , 1993).
Moreover, there is a general tendency for CO
2enrichment 
to change the composition of plants, and in particular to reducenitrogen concentration in above-ground plant tissues – around 14% on average under CO
2enhancement (Cotrufo et al. , 1998).
This in turn may have indirect effects on plant–animal interac-tions, because insect herbivores may then eat 20–80% morefoliage to maintain their nitrogen intake and fail to gain weightas fast (Figure 3.15).
CO
2enhancement may also reduce
concentrations in plants of otheressential nutrients and micronutrients(Figure 3.16) (see Section 3.5), con-tributing in turn to ‘micronutrient
malnutrition’, which diminishes the health and economy of
more than one-half of the world’s human population (Loladze,2002).3.4 Water
The volume of water that becomes incorporated in higher plants
during growth is inﬁnitesimal in comparison to the volume thatﬂows through the plant in the transpiration stream. Nevertheless,water is a critical resource. Hydration is a necessary condition for metabolic reactions to proceed, and because no organism is
completely watertight its water content needs continual replen-ishment. Most terrestrial animals drink free water and also gen-erate some from the metabolism of food and body materials; thereare extreme cases in which animals of arid zones may obtain alltheir water from their food.
3.4.1 Roots as water foragers
For most terrestrial plants, the main source of water is the soil
and they gain access to it through a root system. We proceed here
•• ••
Mean larval weight (mg)
30 1000600
20
Larval age (days)500
400300200
100High CO2
Low CO2
Figure 3.15 Growth of larvae of the buckeye butterﬂy ( Junonia
coenia ) feeding on Plantago lanceolata that had been grown at
ambient and elevated CO2 concentrations. (After Fajer, 1989.)what will be the
consequences ofcurrent rises?
CO2and nitrogen and
micronutrientcomposition
N P K S Mg Fe Zn Mn Cu CaChange in mean concentration (%)–25.0–15.05.0
Element–5.0 Figure 3.16 Changes in the
concentrations of nutrients in plant
material grown at twice-ambientatmospheric CO
2concentrations, based on
25 studies on leaves of a variety of plants(colored bars) and ﬁve studies of wheatgrains (gray bars). Black lines indicate thestandard errors. (After Loladze, 2002.)EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 7374 CHAPTER 3
(and in the next section on plant nutrient resources) on the basis
of plants simply having ‘roots’. In fact, most plants do not haveroots – they have mycorrhizae: associations of fungal and roottissue in which both partners are crucial to the resource-gatheringproperties of the whole. Mycorrhizae, and the respective roles of
the plants and the fungi, are discussed in Chapter 13.
It is not easy to see how roots evolved by the modiﬁcation of
any more primitive organ (Harper et al. , 1991), yet the evolution
of the root was almost certainly the most inﬂuential event thatmade an extensive land ﬂora and fauna possible. Once roots hadevolved they provided secure anchorage for structures the sizeof trees and a means for making intimate contact with mineralnutrients and water within the soil.
Water enters the soil as rain or
melting snow and forms a reservoir in
the pores between soil particles. Whathappens to it then depends on the size of the pores, which may hold it 
by capillary forces against gravity. If the pores are wide, as in asandy soil, much of the water will drain away until it reaches someimpediment and accumulates as a rising watertable or ﬁnds itsway into streams or rivers. The water held by soil pores againstthe force of gravity is called the ‘ﬁeld capacity’ of the soil. Thisis the upper limit of the water that a freely drained soil will retain.There is a less clearly deﬁned lower limit to the water that can
be used in plant growth (Figure 3.17). This is determined by theability of plants to extract water from the narrower soil pores,and is known as the ‘permanent wilting point’ – the soil watercontent at which plants wilt and are unable to recover. The 
permanent wilting point does not differ much between the plantspecies of mesic environments (i.e. with a moderate amount ofwater) or between species of crop plants, but many species nativeto arid regions can extract signiﬁcantly more water from the soil.
As a root withdraws water from the soil pores at its surface,
it creates water-depletion zones around it. These determine gradi-ents of water potential between the interconnected soil pores. Water ﬂows along the gradient into the depleted zones, supply-ing further water to the root. This simple process is made much
more complex because the more the soil around the roots isdepleted of water, the more resistance there is to water ﬂow. Asthe root starts to withdraw water from the soil, the ﬁrst waterthat it obtains is from the wider pores because they hold the waterwith weaker capillary forces. This leaves only the narrower, moretortuous water-ﬁlled paths through which ﬂow can occur, and sothe resistance to water ﬂow increases. Thus, when the rootdraws water from the soil very rapidly, the resource depletion zone(RDZ; see Section 3.2.1) becomes sharply deﬁned and water canmove across it only slowly. For this reason, rapidly transpiring
•• ••7 6 4 0 5p F 123–1000 –10.0 –0.001 Bars –0.10.0001 0.001 0.1 1000 0.01 Pore
size
(µm)100 10
Water unavailable Available
water to
many native
speciesWater drains away freely Available waterRootlet
diametersRoot
hairsBacterial
cellsField capacity
Permanent
wilting point(species specific)
Figure 3.17 The status of water in the soil, showing the relationship between three measures of water status: (i) pF, the logarithm of 
the height (cm) of the column of water that the soil would support; (ii) water status expressed as atmospheres or bars; (iii) t he diameter of 
soil pores that remain water-ﬁlled. The size of water-ﬁlled pores may be compared in the ﬁgure with the sizes of rootlets, root  hairs and
bacterial cells. Note that for most species of crop plant the permanent wilting point is at approximately −15 bars ( −1.5×106Pa), but in
many other species it reaches −80 bars ( −8×106Pa), depending on the osmotic potentials that the species can develop.
ﬁeld capacity and the
permanent wiltingpointEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 74RESOURCES 75
plants may wilt in a soil that contains abundant water. The
ﬁneness and degree of ramiﬁcation of the root system throughthe soil then become important in determining the access of theplant to the water in the soil reservoir.
Water that arrives on a soil surface
as rain or as melting snow does not dis-
tribute itself evenly. Instead, it tends tobring the surface layer to ﬁeld capacity,and further rain extends this layer 
further and further down into the soil proﬁle. This means thatdifferent parts of the same plant root system may encounter waterheld with quite different forces, and indeed the roots can movewater between soil layers (Caldwell & Richards, 1986). In arid areas,where rainfall is in rare, short showers, the surface layers may be
brought to ﬁeld capacity whilst the rest of the soil stays at or belowwilting point. This is a potential hazard in the life of a seedlingthat may, after rain, germinate in the wet surface layers lying abovea soil mass that cannot provide the water resource to support its further growth. A variety of specialized dormancy-breakingmechanisms are found in species living in such habitats, protect-ing them against too quick a response to insufﬁcient rain.
The root system that a plant establishes early in its life can
determine its responsiveness to future events. Where mostwater is received as occasional showers on a dry substrate, a seedlingwith a developmental program that puts its early energy into adeep taproot will gain little from subsequent showers. By con-trast, a program that determines that the taproot is formed early
in life may guarantee continual access to water in an environmentin which heavy rains ﬁll a soil reservoir to depth in the spring,but there is then a long period of drought.
3.4.2 Scale, and two views of the loss of plant water 
to the atmosphere
There are two very different ways in which we can analyze 
and explain the loss of water from plants to the atmosphere. Plantphysiologists going back at least to Brown and Escombe in 1900have emphasized the way in which the behavior of the stomatadetermines the rate at which a leaf loses water. It now seems obvi-
ous that it is the frequency and aperture of pores in an otherwisemainly waterproof surface that will control the rate at which waterdiffuses from a leaf to the outside atmosphere. But micrometero-logists take a quite different viewpoint, focusing on vegetation as a whole rather than on the single stoma, leaf or plant. Theirapproach emphasizes that water will be lost by evaporation onlyif there is latent heat available for this evaporation. This may befrom solar radiation received directly by the transpiring leaves oras ‘advective’ energy, i.e. heat received as solar radiation elsewhere
but transported in moving air. The micrometeorologists have devel-oped formulae for the rate of water loss that are based entirelyon the weather: wind speed, solar radiation, temperature and soon. They wholly ignore both the species of plants and their 
physiology, but their models nevertheless prove to be powerfulpredictors of the evaporation of water from vegetation that is not suffering from drought. Neither approach is right or wrong:which to use depends on the question being asked. Large-scale,climatically based models, for example, are likely to be the mostrelevant in predicting the evapotranspiration and photosynthesisthat might occur in areas of vegetation as a result of globalwarming and changes in precipitation (Aber & Federer, 1992).
3.5 Mineral nutrients
It takes more than light, CO2and water
to make a plant. Mineral resources are
also needed. The mineral resources thatthe plant must obtain from the soil (or,in the case of aquatic plants, from the surrounding water) include
macronutrients (i.e. those needed in relatively large amounts) –nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), sulfur (S), potassium (K), calcium (Ca),magnesium (Mg) and iron (Fe) – and a series of trace elements –
for example, manganese (Mn), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), boron (B)
and molybdenum (Mo) (Figure 3.18). (Many of these elementsare also essential to animals, although it is more common for animals to obtain them in organic form in their food than as inorganic chemicals.) Some plant groups have special requirements.For example, aluminum is a necessary nutrient for some ferns,
silicon for diatoms and selenium for certain planktonic algae.
Green plants do not obtain their mineral resources as a single
package. Each element enters the plant independently as an ionor a molecule, and each has its own characteristic properties ofabsorption in the soil and of diffusion, which affect its accessibil-ity to the plant even before any selective processes of uptake occurat the root membranes. All green plants require all of the ‘essen-tial’ elements listed in Figure 3.18, although not in the same pro-portion, and there are some quite striking differences between themineral compositions of plant tissues of different species andbetween the different parts of a single plant (Figure 3.19).
Many of the points made about
water as a resource, and about roots 
as extractors of this resource, applyequally to mineral nutrients. Strategic differences in develop-mental programs can be recognized between the roots of dif-ferent species (Figure 3.20a), but it is the ability of root systemsto override strict programs and be opportunistic that makesthem effective exploiters of the soil. Most roots elongate beforethey produce laterals, and this ensures that exploration precedesexploitation. Branch roots usually emerge on radii of the parentroot, secondary roots radiate from these primaries and tertiariesfrom the secondaries. These rules reduce the chance that twobranches of the same root will forage in the same soil particle andenter each other’s RDZs.
•• ••roots and the
dynamics of waterdepletion zones
macronutrients andtrace elements
roots as foragersEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 75••76 CHAPTER 3
Roots pass through a medium in which they meet obstacles
and encounter heterogeneity – patches of nutrient that vary on
the same scale as the diameter of a root itself. In 1 cm of growth,a root may encounter a boulder, pebbles and sand grains, a deador living root, or the decomposing body of a worm. As a root
passes through a heterogeneous soil (and all soils are heteroge-neous seen from a ‘root’s-eye view’), it responds by branchingfreely in zones that supply resources, and scarcely branching inless rewarding patches (Figure 3.20b). That it can do so dependson the individual rootlet’s ability to react on an extremely localscale to the conditions that it meets.
There are strong interactions be-
tween water and nutrients as resourcesfor plant growth. Roots will not grow
freely into soil zones that lack availablewater, and so nutrients in these zones
will not be exploited. Plants deprived of essential minerals makeless growth and may then fail to reach volumes of soil that contain available water. There are similar interactions between
mineral resources. A plant starved of nitrogen makes poor rootgrowth and so may fail to ‘forage’ in areas that contain availablephosphate or indeed contain more nitrogen.
Of all the major plant nutrients, nitrates move most freely in
the soil solution and are carried from as far away from the root
surface as water is carried. Hence nitrates will be most mobile insoils at or near ﬁeld capacity, and in soils with wide pores. TheRDZs for nitrates will then be wide, and those produced aroundneighboring roots will be more likely to overlap. Competition canthen occur – even between the roots of a single plant.
The concept of RDZs is important not only in visualizing how
one organism inﬂuences the resources available to another, butalso in understanding how the architecture of the root system affects
the capture of these resources. For a plant growing in an envir-onment in which water moves freely to the root surface, thosenutrients that are freely in solution will move with the water. Theywill then be most effectively captured by wide ranging, but not
••Essential to restricted groups of organisms
Boron – Some vascular plants and algae (a)
Chromium – Probably essential in higher animals (b)
Cobalt – Essential in ruminants and N-fixing legumes (c)
Fluorine – Beneficial to bone and tooth formation (d)
Iodine – Higher animals (e)
Selenium – Some higher animals? (f)
Silicon – Diatoms (g)
Vanadium – Tunicates, echinoderms and some algae (h)Essential to most living organisms
Essential to animalsEssential for most organisms
1
H
3
Li
11
Na
19
K
37
Rb
55
Cs
87
Fr4
Be
12
Mg
20
Ca
38
Sr
56
Ba
88
Ra21
Sc
39
Y
57
La
89
Ac22
Ti
40
Zr
72
Hf23
V
41
Nb
73
Ta24
Cr
42
Mo
74
W25
Mn
43
Tc
75
Re26
Fe
44
Ru
76
Os27
Co
45
Rh
77
Ir28
Ni
46
Pd
78
Pt29
Cu
47
Ag
79
Au30
Zn
48
Cd
80
Hg5
B
13
Al
31
Ga
49
In
81
Tl6
C
14
Si
32
Ge
50
Sn
82
Pb7
N
15
P
33
As
51
Sb
83
Bi8
O
16
S
34
Se
52
Te
84
Po9
F
17
Cl
35
Br
53
I
85
At2
He
10
Ne
18
Ar
36
Kr
54
Xe
86
Rn(h) (b) (c)(a)
(g)
(f)(c)
(e)
Lanthanons58
Ce59
Pr60
Nd61
Pm62
Sm63
Eu64
Gd65
Tb66
Dy67
Ho68
Er69
Tm70
Yb71
Lu
Actinons90
Th91
Pa92
U93
Np94
Pu95
Am96
Cm97
Bk98
Cf99
Es100
Fm101
Md102
No103
Lr
Figure 3.18 Periodic table of the elements showing those that are essential resources in the life of various organisms.
interactions between
foraging for waterand nutrientsEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 76•• ••(a)
Quercus alba Quercus ilicifolia Pinus rigida Vaccinium vacillans
(b)
Wood Bark Roots
Leaves Flowers FruitsN
P
K
Ca
Mg
S
Fe
Na
Figure 3.19 (a) The relative concentration of various minerals in whole plants of four species in the Brookhaven Forest, New York. 
(b) The relative concentration of various minerals in different tissues of the white oak ( Quercus alba ) in the Brookhaven Forest. Note that
the differences between species are much less than between the parts of a single species. (After Woodwell et al. , 1975).Depth (m)
3.00.5(a)
2.52.01.51.00Mc
Pt ApsAp Pt
Bd McBg
Sm
Sand
SandClay(b)
Figure 3.20 (a) The root systems of plants
in a typical short-grass prairie after a run of
years with average rainfall (Hays, Kansas).Ap, Aristida purpurea ; Aps, Ambrosia
psilostachya ; Bd, Buchloe dactyloides ; Bg,
Bouteloua gracilis ; Mc, Malvastrum coccineum ;
Pt, Psoralia tenuiﬂora ; Sm, Solidago mollis .
(After Albertson, 1937; Weaver &
Albertson, 1943.) (b) The root systemdeveloped by a plant of wheat grownthrough a sandy soil containing a layer of clay. Note the responsiveness of rootdevelopment to the localized environmentthat it encounters. (Courtesy of J.V. Lake.)EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 7778 CHAPTER 3
intimately branched, root systems. The less freely that water moves
in the soil, the narrower will be the RDZs, and the more it willpay the plant to explore the soil intensively rather than extensively.
The soil solution that ﬂows through
soil pores to the root surface has a
biased mineral composition comparedwith what is potentially available. Thisis because different mineral ions areheld by different forces in the soil. Ions
such as nitrate, calcium and sodium may, in a fertile agriculturalsoil, be carried to the root surface faster than they are accumu-lated in the body of the plant. By contrast, the phosphate and potas-sium content of the soil solution will often fall far short of theplant’s requirements. Phosphate is bound on soil colloids by 
surfaces that bear calcium, aluminum and ferric ions, and the rateat which it can be extracted by plants then depends on the rateat which its concentration is replenished by release from the colloids. In dilute solutions, the diffusion coefﬁcients of ions thatare not absorbed, such as nitrate, are of the order of 10
−5cm2s−l,
and for cations such as calcium, magnesium, ammonium and potas-
sium they are 10−7cm2s−1. For strongly absorbed anions such as
phosphate, the coefﬁcients are as low as 10−9cm2s−1. The diffusion
rate is the main factor that determines the width of an RDZ.
For resources like phosphate that have low diffusion coefﬁci-
ents, the RDZs will be narrow (Figure 3.21); roots or root hairswill only tap common pools of resource (i.e. will compete) if theyare very close together. It has been estimated that more than 90%
of the phosphate absorbed by a root hair in a 4-day period willhave come from the soil within 0.1 mm of its surface. Two rootswill therefore only draw on the same phosphate resource in this period if they are less than 0.2 mm apart. A widely spaced,extensive root system tends to maximize access to nitrate, whilsta narrowly spaced, intensively branched root system tends to maximize access to phosphates (Nye & Tinker, 1977). Plantswith different shapes of root system may therefore tolerate dif-
ferent levels of soil mineral resources, and different species maydeplete different mineral resources to different extents. This maybe of great importance in allowing a variety of plant species tocohabit in the same area (coexistence of competitors is discussedin Chapters 8 and 19).
3.6 Oxygen
Oxygen is a resource for both animals and plants. Only a few
prokaryotes can do without it. Its diffusibility and solubility in water are very low and so it becomes limiting most quickly inaquatic and waterlogged environments. Its solubility in water alsodecreases rapidly with increasing temperature. When organic
matter decomposes in an aquatic environment, microbial respira-tion makes a demand for oxygen and this ‘biological oxygendemand’ may constrain the types of higher animal that can persist.High biological oxygen demands are particularly characteristic ofstill waters into which leaf litter or organic pollutants are depositedand they become most acute during periods of high temperature.
Because oxygen diffuses so slowly in water, aquatic animals
must either maintain a continual ﬂow of water over their respir-atory surfaces (e.g. the gills of ﬁsh), or have very large surface
areas relative to body volume (e.g. many aquatic crustacea havelarge feathery appendages), or have specialized respiratory pigments or a slow respiration rate (e.g. the midge larvae that live in still and nutrient-rich waters), or continually return to thesurface to breathe (e.g. whales, dolphins, turtles and newts).
The roots of many higher plants fail to grow into water-
logged soil, or die if the water table rises after they have penetrateddeeply. These reactions may be direct responses to oxygendeﬁciency or responses to the accumulation of gases such as hydrogen sulﬁde, methane and ethylene, which are produced bymicroorganisms engaged in anaerobic decomposition. Even if rootsdo not die when starved of oxygen, they may cease to absorb min-eral nutrients so that the plants suffer from mineral deﬁciencies.
3.7 Organisms as food resources
Autotrophic organisms (green plants and
certain bacteria) assimilate inorganic
resources into packages of organic
•• ••variations between
nutrients in theirfreedom ofmovement
Figure 3.21 Radioautograph of soil in which seedlings 
of mustard have been grown. The soil was supplied with
radioactively labeled phosphate (32PO4−) and the zones that have
been depleted by the activity of the roots show up clearly aswhite. (After Nye & Tinker, 1977.)autotrophs and
heterotrophsEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 78RESOURCES 79
molecules (proteins, carbohydrates, etc.). These become the
resources for heterotrophic organisms (decomposers, parasites,
predators and grazers), which take part in a chain of events inwhich each consumer of a resource becomes, in turn, a resourcefor another consumer. At each link in this food chain the most
obvious distinction is between saprotrophs and predators (deﬁnedbroadly).
Saprotrophs – bacteria, fungi and detritivorous animals (see
Chapter 11) – use other organisms, or parts of other organisms,as food but only after they have died, or they consume anotherorganism’s waste or secretory products.
Predators use other living organi-
sms, or parts of other living organisms,as food. True predators predictably kill
their prey. Examples include a moun-tain lion consuming a rabbit but also
consumers that we may not refer to as predators in everydayspeech: a water ﬂea consuming phytoplankton cells, a squirrel 
eating an acorn, and even a pitcher plant drowning a mosquito.
Grazing can also be regarded as a type of predation, but the food
(prey) organism is not killed; only part of the prey is taken, leav-ing the remainder with the potential to regenerate. Grazers feedon (or from) many prey during their lifetime. True predation andgrazing are discussed in detail in Chapter 9. Parasitism , too, is a
form of predation in which the consumer usually does not kill itsfood organism; but unlike a grazer, a parasite feeds from only oneor a very few host organisms in its lifetime (see Chapter 12).
An important distinction amongst
animal consumers is whether they are
specialized or generalized in their diet.Generalists ( polyphagous species) take a
wide variety of prey species, though they very often have clearpreferences and a rank order of what they will choose when there are alternatives available. Specialists may consume only particular parts of their prey though they range over a numberof species. This is most common among herbivores because, aswe shall see, different parts of plants are quite different in theircomposition. Thus, many birds specialize on eating seeds thoughthey are seldom restricted to a particular species. Other speci-alists, however, may feed on only a narrow range of closely related species or even just a single species (when they are saidto be monophagous ). Examples are caterpillars of the cinnabar moth
(which eat the leaves, ﬂower buds and very young stems ofspecies of ragwort, Senecio ) and many species of host-speciﬁc 
parasites.
Many of the resource-use patterns found among animals
reﬂect the different lifespans of the consumer and what it con-sumes. Individuals of long-lived species are likely to be gener-alists: they cannot depend on one food resource being availablethroughout their life. Specialization is increasingly likely if a con-sumer has a short lifespan. Evolutionary forces can then shapethe timing of the consumer’s food demands to match thetimetable of its prey. Specialization also allows the evolution of
structures that make it possible to deal very efﬁciently with par-ticular resources – this is especially the case with mouthparts. Astructure like the stylet of an aphid (Figure 3.22) can be interpretedas an exquisite product of the evolutionary process that has
given the aphid access to a valuable food resource – or as an example of the ever-deepening rut of specialization that has constrained what aphids can feed on. The more specialized thefood resource required by an organism, the more it is constrainedto live in patches of that resource orto spend time and energy 
in searching for it among a mixture of resources. This is one ofthe costs of specialization.
3.7.1 The nutritional content of plants and animals as food
As a ‘package’ of resources, the body 
of a green plant is quite different from the body of an animal. This has atremendous effect on the value of these resources as potential food(Figure 3.23). The most important contrast is that plant cells are
bounded by walls of cellulose, lignin and/or other structuralmaterials. It is these cell walls that give plant material its high ﬁbercontent. The presence of cell walls is also largely responsible for the high ﬁxed carbon content of plant tissues and the highratio of carbon to other important elements. For example, the carbon : nitrogen (C : N) ratio of plant tissues commonly exceeds40 : 1, in contrast to the ratios of approximately 10 : 1 in bacteria,fungi and animals. Unlike plants, animal tissues contain no struc-tural carbohydrate or ﬁber component but are rich in fat and, in
particular, protein.
The various parts of a plant have 
very different compositions (Figure 3.23)and so offer quite different resources.Bark, for example, is largely composedof dead cells with corky and ligniﬁed walls and is quite useless asa food for most herbivores (even species of ‘bark beetle’ special-ize on the nutritious cambium layer just beneath the bark, ratherthan on the bark itself ). The richest concentrations of plant pro-teins (and hence of nitrogen) are in the meristems in the buds atshoot apices and in leaf axils. Not surprisingly, these are usuallyheavily protected with bud scales and defended from herbivoresby thorns and spines. Seeds are usually dried, packaged reserves
rich in starch or oils as well as specialized storage proteins. Andthe very sugary and ﬂeshy fruits are resources provided by theplant as ‘payment’ to the animals that disperse the seeds. Verylittle of the plants’ nitrogen is ‘spent’ on these rewards.
The dietary value of different tissues and organs is so differ-
ent that it is no surprise to ﬁnd that most small herbivores arespecialists – not only on particular species or plant groups, buton particular plant parts: meristems, leaves, roots, stems, etc. Thesmaller the herbivore, the ﬁner is the scale of heterogeneity of
•• ••saprotrophs,
predators, grazersand parasites
specialists andgeneralistsC : N ratios inanimals and plants
different plant partsrepresent verydifferent resources . . .EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 79••80 CHAPTER 3
the plant on which it may specialize. Extreme examples can be
found in the larvae of various species of oak gall wasps, some ofwhich may specialize on young leaves, some on old leaves, someon vegetative buds, some on male ﬂowers and others on root tissues.
Although plants and their parts
may differ widely in the resources they
offer to potential consumers, the com-position of the bodies of different herbivores is remarkably similar. Interms of the content of protein, car-
bohydrate, fat, water and minerals per gram there is very littleto choose between a diet of caterpillars, cod or venison. The pack-ages may be differently parceled (and the taste may be different),
but the contents are essentially the same. Carnivores, then, arenot faced with problems of digestion (and they vary rather littlein their digestive apparatus), but rather with difﬁculties in ﬁnding,catching and handling their prey (see Chapter 9).
Differences in detail aside, herbivores that consume living plant
material – and saprotrophs that consume dead plant material –all utilize a food resource that is rich in carbon and poor in 
protein. Hence, the transition from plant to consumer involvesa massive burning off of carbon as the C : N ratio is lowered. Thisis the realm of ecological stoichiometry (Elser & Urabe 1999): theanalysis of constraints and consequences in ecological interactions
of the mass balance of multiple chemical elements (particularlythe ratios of carbon to nitrogen and of carbon to phosphorus –see Sections 11.2.4 and 18.2.5). The main waste products oforganisms that consume plants are carbon-rich compounds: CO
2,
ﬁber, and in the case of aphids, for example, carbon-rich honey-
dew dripping from infested trees. By contrast, the greater part of the energy requirements of carnivores is obtained from the protein and fats of their prey, and their main excretory products
are in consequence nitrogenous.
The differential in C : N ratios
between plants and microbial decom-posers also means that the long-termeffects of CO
2enhancement (see
Section 3.3.4) are not as straightforward as might be imagined
(Figure 3.24): that is, it is not necessarily the case that plant
••(b) (a)
Piercing
mouthpartsLabium bentTo midgut
Food being sucked
from phloem
Vein in leaf
Leaf sectionStylet track with stylet
Empty stylet tracks
Figure 3.22 The stylet of an aphid penetrating the host tissues and reaching the sugar-rich phloem cells in the leaf veins. (a) Aphid
mouthparts and cross-section of a leaf. (b) A stylet, showing its circuitous path through a leaf. (After Tjallingii & Hogen Esc h, 1993.)
. . . but the
composition of all herbivores isremarkably similar
C : N ratios and theeffects of CO
2
enhancementEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 80•• ••Goose Shrimp
T-bone LiverFish
Catfish HeartCow
KidneyMung bean SesameTuber
PotatoSeeds
Buckwheat Brazil nutFruit
PlumFungus
(Agaricus campestris )Hardwood HardwoodPhloem sap
(Yucca flaccida )
LettuceWood
SoftwoodBark
SoftwoodPetiole Leaf
Cabbage
Minerals
Fat
Carbohydrate
Fiber
Protein
Xylans and other
wood chemicals
Figure 3.23 The composition of various plant parts and of the bodies of animals that serve as food resources for other organisms. (Data
from various sources.)EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 8182 CHAPTER 3
biomass is increased. If the microbes themselves are carbon-
limited, then increased CO2concentrations, apart from their
direct effects on plants, might stimulate microbial activity, makingother nutrients, especially nitrogen, available to plants, further stimulating plant growth. Certainly, short-term experimentshave demonstrated this kind of effect on decomposer communi-
ties. On the other hand, though, decomposers may be nitrogen-limited, either initially or following a period of enhanced plantgrowth during which nitrogen accumulates in plant biomass andlitter. Then, microbial activity would be depressed, diminishingthe release of nutrients to plants and potentially preventing theirenhanced growth in spite of elevated CO
2concentrations. These,
though, are longer term effects and to date very few data have
been collected to detect them. The more general issue of localand global ‘carbon budgets’ is taken up again in Section 18.4.6.
3.7.2 Digestion and assimilation of plant material
The large amounts of ﬁxed carbon inplant materials mean that they arepotentially rich sources of energy. It is
other components of the diet (e.g. nitrogen) that are more likelyto be limiting. Yet most of that energy is only directly available
to consumers if they have enzymes capable of mobilizing cellu-lose and lignins, whereas the overwhelming majority of speciesin both the plant and animal kingdoms lack these enzymes. Ofall the many constraints that put limits on what living organismscan do, the failure of so many to have evolved cellulolyticenzymes is a particular evolutionary puzzle. It may be that gut-inhabiting, cellulolytic prokaryotes have so readily formed intimate, ‘symbiotic’ relationships with herbivores (see Chap-
ter 13) that there has been little selection pressure to evolve 
cellulases of their own (Martin, 1991). It is now recognized that
a number of insects do indeed produce their own cellulases butthe vast majority nevertheless depend on symbionts.
Because most animals lack cellulases, the cell wall material of
plants hinders the access of digestive enzymes to the contents 
of plant cells. The acts of chewing by the grazing mammal, cook-ing by humans and grinding in the gizzard of birds allow diges-tive enzymes to reach cell contents more easily. The carnivore,by contrast, can more safely gulp its food.
When plant parts are decomposed, material with a high car-
bon content is converted to microbial bodies with a relatively lowcarbon content – the limitations on microbial growth and multi-plication are resources other than carbon. Thus, when microbesmultiply on a decaying plant part, they withdraw nitrogen and
other mineral resources from their surroundings and build theminto their own microbial bodies. For this reason, and because micro-bial tissue is more readily digested and assimilated, plant detritusthat has been richly colonized by microorganisms is generally preferred by detritivorous animals.
In herbivorous vertebrates the rate
of energy gain from different dietaryresources is determined by the structure
of the gut – in particular, the balancebetween a well-stirred anterior chamber in which microbial fermentation occurs (AF), a connecting tube in which there is digestion but no fermentation (D), and a posterior fermentationchamber, the colon and cecum (PF). Models of such three-partdigestive systems (Alexander, 1991) suggest that large AF, smallD and small PF (e.g. the ruminant) would give near-optimal gains
•• ••Nutrient
mineralization
Microbial
grazingPlant
N uptakePlant
growth
Microbial
growthSoil C
availabilityPlant
growth
Litter
decompositionNutrient
mineralizationPlant
growth
Microbial
activitiesMicrobial
activitiesMicrobial
growthSoil N
availabilityC storageN becomes limiting
to microbesNet N accumulation
in plant biomass or litterC is limiting
to microbesElevated [CO2]
Positive feedback to plant growth Negative feedback to plant growth
TimeFigure 3.24 Potential positive and
negative feedback from elevated CO2
concentrations to plant growth, to
microbial activity and back to plantgrowth. The arrows between descriptorsindicate causation; the black arrows alongsidedescriptors indicate increases or decreases
in activity. The dashed arrow fromelevated [CO
2] to plant growth indicates
that any effect may be absent as a result of
nutrient-limitation. (After Hu et al. , 1999.)
cellulases, which
most animals lackthe gut structures of herbivorousvertebratesEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 82RESOURCES 83
from poor-quality food, and that large PF, as in horses, is more
appropriate for food with less cell wall material and more cell con-tents. For very high-quality food (a very high proportion of cellcontents and little cell wall material) the optimum gut has longD and no AF or PF.
Elephants, lagomorphs and some rodents eat their own feces
and so double the distance traveled by the food resource
through the digestive system. This allows further fermentationand digestion but may also allow time for dietary deﬁciencies (e.g. of vitamins) to be made good by microbial synthesis. Theseissues are picked up again in Section 13.5.
3.7.3 Physical defenses
All organisms are potentially food
resources for others and so it is not
surprising that many organisms have evolved physical, chemical,morphological and/or behavioral defenses that reduce thechance of an encounter with a consumer and/or increase the chance
of surviving such an encounter. But the interaction does not necessarily stop there. A better defended food resource itself exertsa selection pressure on consumers to overcome that defense; thoughin overcoming that defense, rather than the defenses of otherspecies, the consumer is likely to become relatively specializedon that resource – which is then under particular pressure to defenditself against that particular consumer, and so on. A continuinginteraction can therefore be envisaged in which the evolution ofboth the consumer and the organism consumed depend crucially
on the evolution of the other: a coevolutionary ‘arms race’(Ehrlich & Raven, 1964), which, in its most extreme form, has acoadapted pair of species locked together in perpetual struggle.
Of course, the resources of green plants (and of autotrophs in
general) are not alive and cannot therefore evolve defenses.Coevolution is also not possible between decomposer organismsand their dead food resources, although bacteria, fungi and detri-tivorous animals will often have to contend with the residual effectsof physical and, in particular, chemical defenses in their food.
Simple spines can be an effective
deterrent. The spiny leaves of hollyare not eaten by oak eggar moth larvae
(Lasiocampa quercus ), but if the spines are removed the leaves are
eaten readily. No doubt a similar result would be achieved with
foxes as predators and de-spined hedgehogs as prey. In many smallplanktonic invertebrates that live in lakes, the development ofspines, crests and other appendages that reduce their vulnerabil-ity to predation can be induced by a predator’s presence. Thus,for example, spine development in the offspring of brachionidrotifers, including Keratella cochlearis , is promoted if their mother
was cultured in a medium conditioned by the predatory rotifer,Asplachna priodonta (Stemberger & Gilbert, 1984; Snell, 1998). At
a smaller scale still, many plant surfaces are clothed in epidermalhairs (trichomes) and in some species these develop thick secondary
walls to form strong hooks or points that may trap or impale insects.
Any feature that increases the
energy a consumer spends in discover-
ing or handling a food item – the thickshell of a nut or the ﬁbrous cone on a pine – is a defense if, as aconsequence, the consumer eats less of it. The green plant usesnone of its energetic resources in running away and so may haverelatively more available to invest in energy-rich defense struc-tures. Moreover, most green plants are probably relatively over-provided with energy resources, making it cheap to build shellsaround seeds and woody spines on stems – mainly out of cellu-
lose and lignin – and so protecting the real riches: the scarceresources of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, etc. in the embryosand meristems.
Seeds are most at risk to predators
when they have just ripened and are stillattached, in a cone or ovary, to theparent plant, but their value is literally dissipated as soon as thecapsule opens and the seeds are shed. The poppies illustrate this
point. The seeds of wild poppies are shed through a series of poresat the apex of the capsule as it waves in the wind. Two of thespecies, Papaver rhoeas and P. dubium , open these pores as soon
as the seed is ripe and the capsules are often empty by the following day. Two other species, P. argemone and P. hybridum ,
have seeds that are large relative to the size of the capsule poresand dispersal is a slow process over the fall and winter months.The capsules of these species are defended by spines. The cultiv-ated poppy ( P. somniferum ) by contrast, has been selected by
humans not to disperse its seeds – the capsule pores do not open.
Birds can therefore be a serious pest of the cultivated poppy; theytear open the capsules to reach an oil- and protein-rich reward.Humans, in fact, have selected most of their crops to retainrather than disperse their seeds and these represent sitting targetsfor seed-eating birds.
3.7.4 Chemical defenses
The plant kingdom is very rich in
chemicals that apparently play no rolein the normal pathways of plant bio-chemistry. These ‘secondary’ chemicals range from simplemolecules like oxalic acid and cyanide to the more complex glu-
cosinolates, alkaloids, terpenoids, saponins, ﬂavonoids and tannins
(Futuyma, 1983). Many of these have been shown to be toxic to
a wide range of potential consumers. For example, populationsof white clover, Trifolium repens , are commonly polymorphic for
the ability to release hydrogen cyanide when the tissues areattacked. Plants that lack the ability to generate hydrogencyanide are eaten by slugs and snails: the cyanogenic forms arenibbled but then rejected. Many researchers have assumed that
•• ••coevolution
spinesshells
seeds: dissipation or
protection
secondary chemicals:protectants?EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 8384 CHAPTER 3
protection against consumers has provided the selective pressure
favoring the production of such chemicals. Many others, however,have questioned whether the selective force of herbivory is powerful enough for this (their production may be costly to theplants in terms of essential nutrients) and have pointed to other
properties that they possess: for example as protectants againstultraviolet radiation (Shirley, 1996). None the less, in the few caseswhere selection experiments have been carried out, plants rearedin the presence of consumers have evolved enhanced defensesagainst these enemies, relative to control plants reared in theabsence of consumers (Rausher, 2001). Later, in Chapter 9 whenwe look in more detail at the interaction between predators 
and their prey, we will look at the costs and beneﬁts of prey (especially plant) defense to both the prey itself and its con-
sumers. Here, we focus more on the nature of those defenses.
If the attentions of herbivores select
for plant defensive chemicals, thenequally, those chemicals will select for
adaptations in herbivores that can overcome them: a classiccoevolutionary ‘arms race’. This, though, suggests that plants shouldbecome ever more noxious and herbivores ever more specialized,leaving unanswered the question of why there are so many gen-eralist herbivores, capable of feeding from many plants (Cornell& Hawkins, 2003). An answer has been suggested by ‘apparencytheory’ (Feeny, 1976; Rhoades & Cates, 1976). This is based onthe observation that noxious plant chemicals can be classiﬁedbroadly into two types: (i) toxic (or qualitative) chemicals, which
are poisonous even in small quantities; and (ii) digestion-reducing(or quantitative) chemicals, which act in proportion to their con-centration. Tannins are an example of the second type. They bindproteins, rendering tissues such as mature oak leaves relativelyindigestible. The theory further supposes that toxic chemicals, byvirtue of their speciﬁcity, are likely to be the foundation of anarms race, requiring an equally simple and speciﬁc responsefrom a herbivore; whereas chemicals that make plants generallyindigestible are much more difﬁcult to overcome.
Apparency theory then proposes that relatively short-lived,
ephemeral plants (said to be ‘unapparent’) gain a measure of pro-tection from consumers because of the unpredictability of theirappearance in space and time. They therefore need to invest lessin defense than predictable, long-lived (‘apparent’) species like forest trees. Moreover, the apparent species, precisely because theyare apparent for long, predictable periods to a large number ofherbivores, should invest in digestion-reducing chemicals that, whilecostly, will afford them broad protection; whereas unapparent plantsshould produce toxins since it is only likely to pay a few special-ist species to coevolve against them.
Apparency theory, incorporating ideas on coevolution, there-
fore makes a number of predictions (Cornell & Hawkins, 2003).The most obvious is that more unapparent plants are more likelyto be protected by simple, toxic compounds than by more com-plex, digestion-inhibiting compounds. This can even be seen inthe changing balance of chemical defense in some plants as the
season progresses. For example, in the bracken fern ( Pteridium aquil-
inum ), the young leaves that push up through the soil in spring
are less apparent to potential herbivores than the luxuriantfoliage in late summer. The young leaves are rich in cyanogenic
glucosinolates, whilst the tannin content steadily increases inconcentration to its maximum in mature leaves (Rhoades &Cates, 1976).
A more subtle prediction of the theory is that specialist 
herbivores, having invested evolutionarily in overcoming par-ticular chemicals, should perform best when faced with those chemicals (compared to chemicals they would not normallyencounter); whereas generalists, having invested in performingwell when faced with a wide range of chemicals, should per-
form least well when faced with chemicals that have provokedcoevolutionary responses from specialists. This is supported byan analysis of a wide range of data sets for insect herbivores fed on artiﬁcial diets with added chemicals (892 insect/chemicalcombinations) shown in Figure 3.25.
Furthermore, plants are predicted
to differ in their chemical defenses notonly from species to species but alsowithin an individual plant. ‘Optimaldefense theory’ predicts that the moreimportant an organ or tissue is for an organism’s ﬁtness, the better protected it will be; and in the present context, it predictsthat more important plant parts should be protected by constitu-
tive chemicals (produced all the time), whereas less important
parts should rely on inducible chemicals , only produced in response
to damage itself, and hence with far lower ﬁxed costs to the plants
(McKey, 1979; Strauss et al. , 2004). This is conﬁrmed, for example,
by a study of wild radish, Raphanus sativus , in which plants were
either subjected to herbivory by caterpillars of the butterﬂy,Pieris rapae , or left as unmanipulated controls (Strauss et al. ,
2004). Petals (and all parts of the ﬂower) are known in this insect-pollinated plant to be highly important to ﬁtness. Concentrationsof protective glucosinolates were twice as high in petals as inundamaged leaves, and these levels were maintained constitutively,irrespective of whether the petals were damaged by the caterpil-lars (Figure 3.26). Leaves, on the other hand, have a much lessdirect inﬂuence on ﬁtness: high levels of leaf damage can be sustained without any measurable effect on reproductive output.Constitutive levels of glucosinolates, as already noted, were low;but if the leaves were damaged the (induced) concentrationswere even higher than in the petals.
Similar results were found for the brown seaweed, Sargassum
ﬁlipendula , where the holdfast at its base was the most valuable
tissue: without it the plant would be cast adrift in the water (Tayloret al. , 2002). This was protected by costly constitutive, quantitat-
ive chemicals, whereas the much less valuable youngest stipes (effectively stems) near the tip of the plant were protected onlyby toxic chemicals induced by grazing.
•• ••apparency theory
optimal defense
theory: constitutiveand inducibledefensesEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 84RESOURCES 85
Animals have more options than
plants when it comes to defending
themselves, but some still make use of chemicals. For example,
defensive secretions of sulfuric acid of pH 1 or 2 occur in somemarine gastropod groups, including the cowries. Other animals
that can tolerate the chemical defenses of their plant food, storeand use them in their own defense. A classic example is themonarch butterﬂy ( Danaus plexippus ), whose caterpillars feed on
milkweeds ( Asclepias spp.). Milkweeds contain secondary chem-
icals, cardiac glycosides, which affect the vertebrate heartbeat andare poisonous to mammals and birds. Monarch caterpillars canstore the poison, and it is still present in the adults, which in con-sequence are completely unacceptable to bird predators. A naiveblue jay ( Cyanocitta cristata ) (i.e. one that has not tried a monarchbutterﬂy before) will vomit violently after eating one, and once
it recovers will reject all others on sight. In contrast, monarchsreared on cabbage are edible (Brower & Corvinó, 1967).
Chemical defenses are not equally
effective against all consumers. Indeed,what is unacceptable to most animalsmay be the chosen, even unique, dietof others. It is, after all, an inevitable consequence of having evolved
resistance to a plant’s defenses that a consumer will have gainedaccess to a resource unavailable to most (or all) other species. Forexample, the tropical legume Dioclea metacarpa is toxic to almost
all insect species because it contains a nonprotein amino acid, 
L-canavanine, which insects incorporate into their proteins in
place of arginine. But a species of bruchid beetle, Caryedes brasil-
iensis , has evolved a modiﬁed tRNA synthetase that distinguishes
between l-canavanine and arginine, and the larvae of these beetles
feed solely on D. metacarpa (Rosenthal et al. , 1976).
3.7.5 Crypsis, aposematism and mimicry
An animal may be less obvious to a
predator if it matches its background,or possesses a pattern that disrupts its outline, or resembles aninedible feature of its environment. Straightforward examples ofsuch crypsis are the green coloration of many grasshoppers and
caterpillars, and the transparency of many planktonic animals that
inhabit the surface layers of oceans and lakes. More dramatic casesare the sargassum ﬁsh ( Histrio pictus ), whose body outline mim-
ics the sargassum weed in which it is found, or the caterpillar ofthe viceroy butterﬂy ( Limenitis archippus ) that resembles a bird drop-
ping. Cryptic animals may be highly palatable, but their morphologyand color (and their choice of the appropriate background)reduce the likelihood that they will be used as a resource.
•• ••
Toxicity
3–2.7
11.33.35.3
2(a)
–0.7 Toxicity
3–3
1579
2
Specialism(b)
3
1
–1
Figure 3.25 Combining data from a wide range of published
studies, herbivores were split into three groups: 1, specialists
(feeding from one or two plant families), 2, oligophages (3–9 families) and 3, generalists (more than nine families).Chemicals were split into two groups: (a) those that are, and 
(b) those that are not, found in the normal hosts of specialists and oligophages. With increasing specialization, (a) herbivoressuffered decreased mortality on chemicals that have not provoked a coevolutionary response from specialist herbivores, but (b) suffered higher mortality on chemicals that have not provoked such a response. Regressions: (a) y=0.33 x−1.12; 
r
2=0.032; t=3.25; P=0.0013; (b) y=0.93−0.36 x; r2=0.049; 
t=−4.35; P< 0.00001. (After Cornell & Hawkins, 2003.)
animal defenses
Total glucosinolates
Leaf0102035
Petal51530
25Undamaged
Damaged
Figure 3.26 Concentrations of glucosinolates ( µgm g−1dry mass)
in the petals and leaves of wild radish, Raphanus sativus , either
undamaged or damaged by caterpillars of Pieris rapae . Bars are
standard errors. (After Strauss et al. , 2004.)
one man’s poison is
another man’s meat
crypsisEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 8586 CHAPTER 3
Whilst crypsis may be a defense
strategy for a palatable organism, nox-
ious or dangerous animals often seem to advertize the fact by 
bright, conspicuous colors and patterns. This phenomenon isreferred to as aposematism. The monarch butterﬂy, discussed
above, is aposematically colored, as is its caterpillar, which actu-
ally sequesters the defensive cardiac glucosinolates from its food.The usual evolutionary argument for this runs as follows: con-spicuous coloration will be favored because noxious prey will be recognized (memorized) as such by experienced predators, and thus will be protected, whereas the costs of ‘educating’ thepredator will have been shared amongst the whole population ofconspicuous prey. This argument, however, leaves unansweredthe question of how conspicuous, noxious prey arose in the ﬁrst
place, since when initially rare, they seem likely to be repeatedlyeliminated by naive (i.e. ‘uneducated’) predators (Speed & Ruxton,2002). One possible answer is that predators and prey have coevolved: in each generation – from an original mixture of conspicuous and inconspicuous, noxious and edible prey – con-spicuous edible prey are eliminated, and, with conspicuous preytherefore becoming disproportionately noxious, predators evolvean increased wariness for conspicuous prey (Sherratt, 2002).
The adoption of memorable body
patterns by distasteful prey also imme-diately opens the door for deceit byother species, because there will be 
a clear evolutionary advantage to a palatable prey, ‘the mimic’,
if it looks like an unpalatable species, ‘the model’ (Batesianmimicry). Developing the story of the monarch butterﬂy a littlefurther, the adult of the palatable viceroy butterﬂy mimics thedistasteful monarch, and a blue jay that has learned to avoid mon-archs will also avoid viceroys. There will also be an advantage to aposematically colored, distasteful prey in looking like oneanother (Müllerian mimicry), though many unanswered questionsremain as to where exactly Batesian mimicry ends and Müllerianmimicry begins, in part because there are more theoretical view-points than impeccable data sets that might distinguish betweenthem (Speed, 1999).
By living in holes (e.g. millipedes and moles) animals may avoid
stimulating the sensory receptors of predators, and by ‘playingdead’ (e.g. the opossum Didelphis virginiana and African ground
squirrels) animals may fail to stimulate a killing response. Animalsthat withdraw to a prepared retreat (e.g. rabbits and prairie dogsto their burrows, snails to their shells), or which roll up and pro-tect their vulnerable parts by a tough exterior (e.g. armadillos andpill millipedes), reduce their chance of capture but stake their liveson the chance that the attacker will not be able to breach theirdefenses. Other animals seem to try to bluff themselves out of trouble by threat displays. The startle response of moths andbutterﬂies that suddenly expose eye-spots on their wings is oneexample. No doubt the most common behavioral response of ananimal in danger of being preyed upon is to ﬂee.3.8 A classiﬁcation of resources, and 
the ecological niche
We have seen that every plant requires many distinct resources
to complete its life cycle, and most plants require the same setof resources, although in subtly different proportions. Each of theresources has to be obtained independently of the others, and oftenby quite different uptake mechanisms – some as ions (potassium),
some as molecules (CO
2), some in solution, some as gases.
Carbon cannot be substituted by nitrogen, nor phosphorus by potas-
sium. Nitrogen can be taken up by most plants as either nitrateor ammonium ions, but there is no substitute for nitrogen itself.In complete contrast, for many carnivores, most prey of about
the same size are wholly interchangeable as articles of diet. Thiscontrast between resources that are individually essential for an
organism, and those that are substitutable , can be extended into a
classiﬁcation of resources taken in pairs (Figure 3.27).
In this classiﬁcation, the concentra-
tion or quantity of one resource isplotted on the x-axis, and that of the
other resource on the y-axis. We know
that different combinations of the two resources will support 
different growth rates for the organism in question (this can beindividual growth or population growth). Thus, we can jointogether points (i.e. combinations of resources) with the samegrowth rates, and these are therefore contours or ‘isoclines’ ofequal growth. In Figure 3.27, line B in each case is an isocline ofzero net growth: each of the resource combinations on these lines
allows the organism just to maintain itself, neither increasing nordecreasing. The A isoclines, then, with less resources than B, joincombinations giving the same negative growth rate; whilst the C
isoclines, with more resources than B, join combinations givingthe same positive growth rate. As we shall see, the shapes of the
isoclines vary with the nature of the resources.
3.8.1 Essential resources
Two resources are said to be essential when neither can substi-
tute for the other. Thus, the growth that can be supported on
resource 1 is absolutely dependent on the amount available of resource 2 and vice versa. This is denoted in Figure 3.27a bythe isoclines running parallel to both axes. They do so because
the amount available of one resource deﬁnes a maximum possible growth rate, irrespective of the amount of the otherresource. This growth rate is achieved unless the amount avail-able of the other resource deﬁnes an even lower growth rate. Itwill be true for nitrogen and potassium as resources in thegrowth of green plants, and for two obligate hosts in the life ofa parasite or pathogen that are required to alternate in its life cycle(see Chapter 12).
•• ••aposematism
Batesian and
Müllerian mimicryzero net growthisoclinesEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 86RESOURCES 87
3.8.2 Other categories of resource
Two resources are said to be perfectly substitutable when either can
wholly replace the other. This will be true for seeds of wheat or
barley in the diet of a farmyard chicken, or for zebra and gazellein the diet of a lion. Note that we do not imply that the tworesources are as good as each other. This feature (perfectly sub-
stitutable but not necessarily as good as each other) is includedin Figure 3.27b by the isoclines having slopes that do not cut bothaxes at the same distance from the origin. Thus, in Figure 3.27b,in the absence of resource 2, the organism needs relatively littleof resource 1, but in the absence of resource 1 it needs a relat-ively large amount of resource 2.
Substitutable resources are deﬁned
as complementary if the isoclines bow
inwards towards the origin (Figure
3.27c). This shape means that a species
requires less of two resources when taken together than whenconsumed separately. A good example is human vegetarianscombining beans and rice in their diet. The beans are rich in lysine,an essential amino acid poorly represented in rice, whilst rice isrich in sulfur-containing amino acids that are present only in lowabundance in beans.
A pair of substitutable resources
with isoclines that bow away from the origin are deﬁned as antagonistic
(Figure 3.27d). The shape indicates
that a species requires proportionately more resource to main-tain a given rate of increase when two resources are consumed
together than when consumed separately. This could arise, forexample, if the resources contain different toxic compounds that
act synergistically (more than just additively) on their consumer.For example, d, l-pipecolic acid and djenkolic acid (two defens-
ive chemicals found in certain seeds) had no signiﬁcant effect onthe growth of the seed-eating larva of a bruchid beetle if consumedseparately, but they had a pronounced effect if taken together( Janzen et al., 1977).
Finally, Figure 3.27e illustrates the
phenomenon of inhibition at high
resource levels for a pair of essential
resources: resources that are essential but become damagingwhen in excess. CO
2, water and mineral nutrients such as iron
are all required for photosynthesis, but each is lethal in excess.
Similarly, light leads to increased growth rates in plants througha broad range of intensities, but can inhibit growth at very highintensities. In such cases, the isoclines form closed curves because
growth decreases with an increase in resources at very high levels.
3.8.3 Resource dimensions of the ecological niche
In Chapter 2 we developed the concept of the ecological 
niche as an n-dimensional hypervolume. This deﬁnes the 
limits within which a given species can survive and reproduce,for a number ( n) of environmental factors, including both 
conditions and resources. Note, therefore, that the zero growth
isoclines in Figure 3.27 deﬁne niche boundaries in two dimen-sions. Resource combinations to one side of line B allow the organisms to thrive – but to the other side of the line the organ-isms decline.
•• ••R2
R1(c) Complementary
AB CR2
R1(a) Essential
ABC
R2
R1(b) Perfectly substitutable
AB C
R2
R1(d) Antagonistic
ABCR2
R1(e) Inhibition
B
AFigure 3.27 Resource-dependent growth
isoclines. Each of the growth isoclines
represents the amounts of two resources(R
1and R2) that would have to exist in a
habitat for a population to have a givengrowth rate. Because this rate increaseswith resource availability, isoclines further from the origin represent higher
population growth rates – isocline A has a negative growth rate, isocline B azero growth rate and isocline C a positivegrowth rate. (a) Essential resources; (b) perfectly substitutable; (c) complementary; (d) antagonistic; and (e) inhibition. (After Tilman, 1982.)
complementary
resources
antagonisticresourcesinhibitionEIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 8788 CHAPTER 3
The resource dimensions of a species’ niche can sometimes
be represented in a manner similar to that adopted for conditions,
with lower and upper limits within which a species can thrive.Thus, a predator may only be able to detect and handle preybetween lower and upper limits of size. For other resources, 
such as mineral nutrients for plants, there may be a lower limitbelow which individuals cannot grow and reproduce but anupper limit may not exist (Figure 3.27a–d). However, manyresources must be viewed as discrete entities rather than con-tinuous variables. Larvae of butterﬂies in the genus Heliconius
require Passiﬂora leaves to eat; those of the monarch butterﬂy 
specialize on plants in the milkweed family; and various speciesof animals require nest sites with particular speciﬁcations. Theseresource requirements cannot be arranged along a continuous graph
axis labeled, for example, ‘food plant species’. Instead, the foodplant or nest-site dimension of their niches needs to be deﬁnedsimply by a restricted list of the appropriate resources.
Together, then, conditions and resources deﬁne a species’
niche. We turn in the next chapter to look in more detail at themost fundamental responses of organisms to those conditions andresources: their patterns of growth, survival and reproduction.
Summary
Resources are entities required by an organism, the quantities 
of which can be reduced by the activity of the organism. Hence,organisms may compete with each other to capture a share of alimited resource.
Autotrophic organisms (green plants and certain bacteria)
assimilate inorganic resources into packages of organic molecules
(proteins, carbohydrates, etc.). These become the resources forheterotrophic organisms, which take part in a chain of events inwhich each consumer of a resource becomes, in turn, a resourcefor another consumer.
Solar radiation is the only source of energy that can be used
in metabolic activities by green plants. Radiant energy is convertedduring photosynthesis into energy-rich chemical compounds ofcarbon, which will subsequently be broken down in respiration.
But the photosynthetic apparatus is able to gain access to energyonly in the waveband of ‘photosynthetically active radiation’. Weexamine variations in the intensity and quality of radiation, andthe responses of plants to such variations. We examine, too, thestrategic and tactical solutions adopted by plants to resolve theconﬂicts between photosynthesis and water conservation.
Carbon dioxide is also essential for photosynthesis. We 
examine variations in its concentration, and their consequences,including global rises over time and those at the smallest spatialscales. There are three pathways to carbon ﬁxation in photo-synthesis: C
3, C4and CAM. The differences between the dif-
ferent pathways and the ecological consequences of them are
explained.
Water is a critical resource for all organisms. For plants, we
examine how roots ‘forage’ for water, and the dynamics of
resource depletion zones around roots, for water and for mineralnutrients. Mineral nutrients, broadly divisible into macronutrientsand trace elements, each enter a plant independently as an ionor a molecule, and have their own characteristic properties of absorption in the soil and of diffusion, which affect their accessibility to a plant.
Oxygen is a resource for both animals and plants. It becomes
limiting most quickly in aquatic and waterlogged environments,and when organic matter decomposes in an aquatic environment,
microbial respiration may so deplete oxygen as to constrain thetypes of higher animal that can persist.
Amongst heterotrophs, we explain the distinctions between
saprotrophs, predators, grazers and parasites, and between spe-cialists and generalists.
The carbon : nitrogen ratio of plant tissues commonly
exceeds greatly that in bacteria, fungi and animals. The main wasteproducts of organisms that consume plants are therefore carbon-rich compounds. By contrast, the main excretory products of carnivores are nitrogenous. The various parts of a plant have verydifferent compositions. Hence, most small herbivores are specialists.The composition of the bodies of different herbivores is remark-ably similar.
Most of the energy sources potentially available to herbivores
comprise cellulose and lignins, but most animals lack cellulases
– an evolutionary puzzle. We explain how, in herbivorous ver-tebrates, the rate of energy gain from different dietary resourcesis determined by the structure of the gut.
Living resources are typically defended: physically, by chem-
icals, or by crypsis, aposematism or mimicry. This may lead to a coevolutionary arms races between the consumer and the consumed.
Apparency theory and optimal defense theory seek to make
sense of the distribution of different protective chemicals, espe-cially those that are constitutive and those that are induced, indifferent plant species and plant parts.
Taking resources in pairs, plots for the consumers of zero net
growth isoclines allow resource pairs to be classiﬁed as essential,perfectly substitutable, complementary, antagonistic or display-ing inhibition. The zero net growth isoclines themselves deﬁnea boundary of a species’ ecological niche.
••EIPC03  10/24/05  1:47 PM  Page 88••4.1 Introduction: an ecological fact of life
In this chapter we change the emphasis of our approach. We will
not be concerned so much with the interaction between individualsand their environment, as with the numbers of individuals andthe processes leading to changes in the number of individuals.
In this regard, there is a fundamental ecological fact of life:
N
now=Nthen+ B−D+I−E. (4.1)
This simply says that the numbers of a particular species pre-
sently occupying a site of interest ( Nnow) is equal to the numbers
previously there ( Nthen), plus the number of births between then
and now ( B), minus the number of deaths ( D), plus the number
of immigrants ( I), minus the number of emigrants ( E).
This deﬁnes the main aim of ecology: to describe, explain and
understand the distribution and abundance of organisms. Ecologists
are interested in the number of individuals, the distributions ofindividuals, the demographic processes (birth, death and migra-tion) that inﬂuence these, and the ways in which these demographicprocesses are themselves inﬂuenced by environmental factors.
4.2 What is an individual?
4.2.1 Unitary and modular organisms
Our ‘ecological fact of life’, though, implies by default that all indi-
viduals are alike, which is patently false on a number of counts.First, almost all species pass through a number of stages in their
life cycle: insects metamorphose from eggs to larvae, sometimesto pupae, and then to adults; plants pass from seeds to seedlings
to photosynthesizing adults; and so on. The different stages arelikely to be inﬂuenced by different factors and to have differentrates of migration, death and of course reproduction.Second, even within a stage, indi-
viduals can differ in ‘quality’ or ‘condition’.
The most obvious aspect of this is size,but it is also common, for example, forindividuals to differ in the amount ofstored reserves they possess.
Uniformity amongst individuals is
especially unlikely, moreover, whenorganisms are modular rather than unitary . In unitary organisms,
form is highly determinate: that is, barring aberrations, all dogshave four legs, all squid have two eyes, etc. Humans are perfectexamples of unitary organisms. A life begins when a sperm fert-ilizes an egg to form a zygote. This implants in the wall of theuterus, and the complex processes of embryonic development com-mence. By 6 weeks the fetus has a recognizable nose, eyes, ears
and limbs with digits, and accidents apart, will remain in this formuntil it dies. The fetus continues to grow until birth, and thenthe infant grows until perhaps the 18th year of life; but the onlychanges in form (as opposed to size) are the relatively minor onesassociated with sexual maturity. The reproductive phase lasts forperhaps 30 years in females and rather longer in males. This isfollowed by a phase of senescence. Death can intervene at anytime, but for surviving individuals the succession of phases is, likeform, entirely predictable.
In modular organisms (Figure 4.1),
on the other hand, neither timing nor
form is predictable. The zygote develops into a unit of construc-tion (a module, e.g. a leaf with its attendant length of stem), whichthen produces further, similar modules. Individuals are composedof a highly variable number of such modules, and their programof development is strongly dependent on their interaction with theirenvironment. The product is almost always branched, and except
for a juvenile phase, effectively immobile. Most plants are modularand are certainly the most obvious group of modular organisms.There are, however, many important groups of modular animalsindividuals differ in
their life cycle stageand their condition
unitary organisms
modular organisms
Chapter 4
Life, Death and 
Life HistoriesEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 89••90 CHAPTER 4
••
(a)
(b)
(c)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 90•• ••LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 91
Figure 4.1 Modular plants (on the left) and animals (on the right), showing the underlying parallels in the various ways they may 
be constructed. (opposite page) (a) Modular organisms that fall to pieces as they grow: duckweed ( Lemna sp.) and Hydra sp. (b) Freely
branching organisms in which the modules are displayed as individuals on ‘stalks’: a vegetative shoot of a higher plant ( Lonicera japonica )
with leaves (feeding modules) and a ﬂowering shoot, and a hydroid colony ( Obelia ) bearing both feeding and reproductive modules. 
(c) Stoloniferous organisms in which colonies spread laterally and remain joined by ‘stolons’ or rhizomes: a single plant of st rawberry
(Fragaria ) spreading by means of stolons, and a colony of the hydroid Tubularia crocea . (above )  (d) Tightly packed colonies of modules: 
a tussock of the spotted saxifrage ( Saxifraga bronchialis ), and a segment of the hard coral Turbinaria reniformis . (e) Modules accumulated 
on a long persistent, largely dead support: an oak tree ( Quercus robur ) in which the support is mainly the dead woody tissues derived 
from previous modules, and a gorgonian coral in which the support is mainly heavily calciﬁed tissues from earlier modules. (For  color, 
see Plate 4.1, between pp. 000 and 000.)
((a) left, © Visuals Unlimited/John D. Cunningham; right, © Visuals Unlimited/Larry Stepanowicz; (b) left, © Visuals Unlimited;  
right, © Visuals Unlimited/Larry Stepanowicz; (c) left, © Visuals Unlimited/Science VU; right, © Visuals Unlimited/John D. Cunn ingham; 
(d) left, © Visuals Unlimited/Gerald and Buff Corsi; right, © Visuals Unlimited/Dave B. Fleetham; (e) left, © Visuals Unlimited /Silwood
Park; right, © Visuals Unlimited/Daniel W. Gotshall.
(d)
(e)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 91•• ••92 CHAPTER 4
(indeed, some 19 phyla, including sponges, hydroids, corals, bryo-
zoans and colonial ascidians), and many modular protists and fungi.Reviews of the growth, form, ecology and evolution of a widerange of modular organisms may be found in Harper et al. (1986a),
Hughes (1989), Room et al. (1994) and Collado-Vides (2001).
Thus, the potentialities for individual difference are far
greater in modular than in unitary organisms. For example, an
individual of the annual plant Chenopodium album may, if grown
in poor or crowded conditions, ﬂower and set seed when only50 mm high. Yet, given more ideal conditions, it may reach 1 min height, and produce 50,000 times as many seeds as its depau-perate counterpart. It is modularity and the differing birth anddeath rates of plant parts that give rise to this plasticity.
In the growth of a higher plant, the fundamental module of
construction above ground is the leaf with its axillary bud and
the attendant internode of the stem. As the bud develops and grows,it produces further leaves, each bearing buds in their axils. Theplant grows by accumulating these modules. At some stage in the development, a new sort of module appears, associated with reproduction (e.g. the ﬂowers in a higher plant), ultimatelygiving rise to new zygotes. Modules that are specialized forreproduction usually cease to give rise to new modules. The rootsof a plant are also modular, although the modules are quite different (Harper et al. , 1991). The program of development in
modular organisms is typically determined by the proportion ofmodules that are allocated to different roles (e.g. to reproductionor to continued growth).
4.2.2 Growth forms of modular organisms
A variety of growth forms and architectures produced by mod-
ular growth in animals and plants is illustrated in Figure 4.1 (forcolor, see Plate 4.1, between pp. 000 and 000). Modular organ-isms may broadly be divided into those that concentrate on vertical growth, and those that spread their modules laterally, 
over or in a substrate. Many plants produce new root systemsassociated with a laterally extending stem: these are the rhizom-atous and stoloniferous plants. The connections between theparts of such plants may die and rot away, so that the product of the original zygote becomes represented by physiologically separated parts. (Modules with the potential for separate existence are known as ‘ramets’.) The most extreme examples of plants ‘falling to pieces’ as they grow are the many species of ﬂoating aquatics like duckweeds ( Lemna ) and the water
hyacinth ( Eichhornia ). Whole ponds, lakes or rivers may be ﬁlled
with the separate and independent parts produced by a single
zygote.
Trees are the supreme example of plants whose growth is 
concentrated vertically. The peculiar feature distinguishing treesand shrubs from most herbs is the connecting system linking modules together and connecting them to the root system. This
does not rot away, but thickens with wood, conferring perenni-ality. Most of the structure of such a woody tree is dead, with athin layer of living material lying immediately below the bark.The living layer, however, continually regenerates new tissue, andadds further layers of dead material to the trunk of the tree, which
solves, by the strength it provides, the difﬁcult problem of obtain-ing water and nutrients below the ground, but also light perhaps50 m away at the top of the canopy.
We can often recognize two or
more levels of modular construction.The strawberry is a good example ofthis: leaves are repeatedly developed from a bud, but theseleaves are arranged into rosettes. The strawberry plant grows: (i) by adding new leaves to a rosette; and (ii) by producing newrosettes on stolons grown from the axils of its rosette leaves. Treesalso exhibit modularity at several levels: the leaf with its axillarybud, the whole shoot on which the leaves are arranged, and the whole branch systems that repeat a characteristic pattern of
shoots.
Many animals, despite variations in their precise method of
growth and reproduction, are as ‘modular’ as any plant. More-over, in corals, for example, just like many plants, the individualmay exist as a physiologically integrated whole, or may be splitinto a number of colonies – all part of one individual, but physiologically independent (Hughes et al. , 1992).
4.2.3 What is the size of a modular population?
In modular organisms, the number of surviving zygotes can 
give only a partial and misleading impression of the ‘size’ of thepopulation. Kays and Harper (1974) coined the word ‘genet’ todescribe the ‘genetic individual’: the product of a zygote. Inmodular organisms, then, the distribution and abundance of
genets (individuals) is important, but it is often more useful tostudy the distribution and abundance of modules (ramets,shoots, tillers, zooids, polyps or whatever): the amount of grassin a ﬁeld available to cattle is not determined by the number ofgenets but by the number of leaves (modules).
4.2.4 Senescence – or the lack of it – in modular
organisms
There is also often no programed senescence of whole modular
organisms – they appear to have perpetual somatic youth. Evenin trees that accumulate their dead stem tissues, or gorgonian coralsthat accumulate old calciﬁed branches, death often results frombecoming too big or succumbing to disease rather than from pro-
gramed senescence. This is illustrated for three types of coral inmodules within
modulesEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 92••LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 93
the Great Barrier Reef in Figure 4.2. Annual mortality declined
sharply with increasing colony size (and hence, broadly, age) until,amongst the largest, oldest colonies, mortality was virtually zero,with no evidence of any increase in mortality at extreme old age(Hughes & Connell, 1987).
At the modular level, things are quite different. The annual
death of the leaves on a deciduous tree is the most dramatic example of senescence – but roots, buds, ﬂowers and the modules
of modular animals all pass through phases of youth, middle age,senescence and death. The growth of the individual genet is thecombined result of these processes. Figure 4.3 shows that the age structure of shoots of the sedge Carex arenaria is changed 
dramatically by the application of NPK fertilizer, even when thetotal number of shoots present is scarcely affected by the treat-ment. The fertilized plots became dominated by young shoots,as the older shoots that were common on control plots were forcedinto early death.
4.2.5 Integration
For many rhizomatous and stoloniferous species, this changing
age structure is in turn associated with a changing level to whichthe connections between individual ramets remain intact. Ayoung ramet may beneﬁt from the nutrients ﬂowing from an olderramet to which it is attached and from which it grew, but the
pros and cons of attachment will have changed markedly by the time the daughter is fully established in its own right and the parent has entered a postreproductive phase of senescence (a comment equally applicable to unitary organisms with parentalcare) (Caraco & Kelly, 1991).
The changing beneﬁts and costs of integration have been
studied experimentally in the pasture grass Holcus lanatus , by 
comparing the growth of: (i) ramets that were left with a phy-siological connection to their parent plant, and in the same 
pot, so that parent and daughter might compete (unsevered,
••0–106957
38
10–5079
3039
>5082
3 8Annual mortality (%)
0204060
Colony area (cm2)103050Acropora
Porites
Pocillopora
Figure 4.2 The mortality rate declines steadily with colony 
size (and hence, broadly, age) in three coral taxa from the reef
crest at Heron Island, Great Barrier Reef (sample sizes are givenabove each bar). (After Hughes & Connell, 1987; Hughes et al. ,
1992.)
>9
8–8.9
7–7.9
6–6.9
5–5.9
4–4.9Cohort age (months)ControlJanuary 1976
3–3.9
2–2.9
1–1.90–0.9Fertilized
>9
8–8.9
7–7.9
6–6.9
5–5.9
4–4.9ControlMature phase
July 1976
3–3.9
2–2.91–1.90–0.9Fertilized
Figure 4.3 The age structure of shoots in clones of the sand sedge Carex arenaria growing on sand dunes in North Wales, UK. Clones 
are composed of shoots of different ages. The effect of applying fertilizer is to change this age structure. The clones become dominated 
by young shoots and the older shoots die. (After Noble et al. , 1979.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 9394 CHAPTER 4
unmoved: UU); (ii) ramets that had their connection severed 
but were left in the same pot so competition was possible (severed, unmoved: SU); and (iii) ramets that had their con-nection severed and were repotted in their parent’s soil, but after the parent had been removed, so no competition was 
possible (SM) (Figure 4.4). These treatments were applied todaughter ramets of various ages, which were then examinedafter a further 8 weeks’ growth. For the youngest daughters(Figure 4.4a) attachment to the parent signiﬁcantly enhancedgrowth (UU >SU), but competition with the parent had no
apparent effect (SU ≈SM). For slightly older daughters (Figure 4.4b),
growth could be depressed by the parent (SU <SM), but 
physiological connection effectively negated this (UU >SU; 
UU≈SM). For even older daughters, the balance shifted further
still: physiological connection to the parent was either not
enough to fully overcome the adverse effects of the parent’s presence (Figure 4.4c; SM >UU>SU) or eventually appeared to
represent a drain on the resources of the daughter (Figure 4.4d;SM>SU>UU).
4.3 Counting individuals
If we are going to study birth, death and modular growth ser-
iously, we must quantify them. This means counting individualsand (where appropriate) modules. Indeed, many studies concernthemselves not with birth and death but with their conse-quences, i.e. the total number of individuals present and the way
these numbers vary with time. Such studies can often be usefulnone the less. Even with unitary organisms, ecologists face enorm-ous technical problems when they try to count what is happeningto populations in nature. A great many ecological questions remainunanswered because of these problems.It is usual to use the term population
to describe a group of individuals of one
species under investigation. What actually constitutes a popula-tion, though, will vary from species to species and from study tostudy. In some cases, the boundaries of a population are readilyapparent: the sticklebacks occupying a small lake are the ‘stickle-back population of the lake’. In other cases, boundaries are deter-mined more by an investigator’s purpose or convenience: it ispossible to study the population of lime aphids inhabiting one leaf,one tree, one stand of trees or a whole woodland. In yet othercases – and there are many of these – individuals are distributed
continuously over a wide area, and an investigator must deﬁnethe limits of a population arbitrarily. In such cases, especially, itis often more convenient to consider the density of a population.
This is usually deﬁned as ‘numbers per unit area’, but in certaincircumstances ‘numbers per leaf’, ‘numbers per host’ or some othermeasure may be appropriate.
To determine the size of a popula-
tion, one might imagine that it is possible simply to count individuals,
especially for relatively small, isolated habitats like islands and relatively large individuals like deer. For most species, however,such ‘complete enumerations’ are impractical or impossible:observability – our ability to observe every individual present –is almost always less than 100%. Ecologists, therefore, mustalmost always estimate the number of individuals in a population
rather than count them. They may estimate the numbers ofaphids on a crop, for example, by counting the number on a 
representative sample of leaves, then estimating the number ofleaves per square meter of ground, and from this estimating the number of aphids per square meter. For plants and animalsliving on the ground surface, the sample unit is generally a smallarea known as a quadrat (which is also the name given to the
•• ••2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
UU SU SM0.0Biomass (g)LSD = 0.055  g(a)
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
UU SU SM0.0LSD = 0.079  g(b)
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
UU SU SM0.0LSD = 0.074  g(c)
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
UU SU SM0.0LSD = 0.154  g(d)
Figure 4.4 The growth of daughter ramets of the grass Holcus lanatus , which were initially (a) 1 week, (b) 2 weeks, (c) 4 weeks and 
(d) 8 weeks old, and were then grown on for a further 8 weeks. LSD, least signiﬁcant difference, which needs to be exceeded for  two
means to be signiﬁcantly different from each other. For further discussion, see text. (After Bullock et al. , 1994a.)
determining
population sizewhat is a population?EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 94LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 95
square or rectangular device used to demarcate the boundaries
of the area on the ground). For soil-dwelling organisms the unitis usually a volume of soil; for lake dwellers a volume of water;for many herbivorous insects the unit is one typical plant or leaf,and so on. Further details of sampling methods, and of methods
for counting individuals generally, can be found in one of manytexts devoted to ecological methodology (e.g. Brower et al. ,
1998; Krebs, 1999; Southwood & Henderson, 2000).
For animals, especially, there are two further methods of estim-
ating population size. The ﬁrst is known as capture–recapture. At its simplest, this involves catching a random sample of a population, marking individuals so that they can be recognizedsubsequently, releasing them so that they remix with the rest of the population and then catching a further random sample.
Population size can be estimated from the proportion of this second sample that bear a mark. Roughly speaking, the propor-tion of marked animals in the second sample will be high whenthe population is relatively small, and low when the populationis relatively large. Data sets become much more complex – andmethods of analysis become both more complex and muchmore powerful – when there are a whole sequence of capture-recapture samples (see Schwarz & Seber, 1999, for a review).
The ﬁnal method is to use an index of abundance. This can
provide information on the relative size of a population, but byitself usually gives little indication of absolute size. As an example,Figure 4.5 shows the effect on the abundance of leopard frogs ( Ranapipiens ) in ponds near Ottawa, Canada, of the number of occu-
pied ponds and the amount of summer (terrestrial) habitat in the
vicinity of the pond. Here, frog abundance was estimated fromthe ‘calling rank’: essentially compounded from whether there wereno frogs, ‘few’, ‘many’ or ‘very many’ frogs calling on each of
four occasions. Despite their shortcomings, even indices of abund-ance can provide valuable information.
Counting births can be more dif-
ﬁcult even than counting individuals.The formation of the zygote is oftenregarded as the starting point in the life of an individual. But itis a stage that is often hidden and extremely hard to study. Wesimply do not know, for most animals and plants, how manyembryos die before ‘birth’, though in the rabbit at least 50% of
embryos are thought to die in the womb, and in many higherplants it seems that about 50% of embryos abort before the seedis fully grown and mature. Hence, it is almost always impossiblein practice to treat the formation of a zygote as the time of birth.In birds we may use the moment that an egg hatches; in mam-mals when an individual ceases to be supported within themother on her placenta and starts to be supported outside her asa suckling; and in plants we may use the germination of a seedas the birth of a seedling, although it is really only the momentat which a developed embryo restarts into growth after a periodof dormancy. We need to remember that half or more of a pop-ulation will often have died before they can be recorded as born!
Counting deaths poses as many
problems. Dead bodies do not linger
long in nature. Only the skeletons oflarge animals persist long after death. Seedlings may be countedand mapped one day and gone without trace the next. Mice, volesand soft-bodied animals such as caterpillars and worms are digestedby predators or rapidly removed by scavengers or decomposers.They leave no carcasses to be counted and no evidence of thecause of death. Capture–recapture methods can go a long waytowards estimating deaths from the loss of marked individuals froma population (they are probably used as often to measure survivalas abundance), but even here it is often impossible to distinguishloss through death and loss through emigration.
4.4 Life cycles
To understand the forces determining the abundance of a popu-
lation, we need to know the phases of the constituent organisms’lives when these forces act most signiﬁcantly. For this, we need tounderstand the sequences of events that occur in those organisms’life cycles. A highly simpliﬁed, generalized life history (Figure 4.6a)
comprises birth, followed by a prereproductive period, a periodof reproduction, perhaps a postreproductive period, and then deathas a result of senescence (though of course other forms of mor-tality may intervene at any time). The variety of life cycles is also
•• ••7
5
4Number of adjacent
ponds with calling
Calling rank at core pond
Area of summer habitat (ha)3
2
1
06
50100150200250
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 4.5 The abundance (calling rank) of leopard frogs in
ponds increases signiﬁcantly with both the number of adjacent
ponds that are occupied and the area of summer habitat within 1 km of the pond. Calling rank is the sum of an index measuredon four occasions, namely: 0, no individuals calling; 1, individuals
can be counted, calls not overlapping; 2, calls of < 15 individuals
can be distinguished with some overlapping; 3, calls of ≥ 15
individuals. (After Pope et al. , 2000.)counting births
counting deathsEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 95•• ••96 CHAPTER 4
Year 1Juvenile
phase
TimeYear 1Juvenile phase
Time(b) (c)
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5Juvenile
phaseReproductive phase(d)
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3Juvenile
phaseReproductive outputReproductive phase(e)
TimeYear 1 Year 2 Year 3 deathYear nJuvenile phase(f)onset of
reproductionbirth end of
reproductiondeath due
to senescence
TimeJuvenile phase dominated
by growthReproductive
phasePostreproductive
phaseReproductive output(a)
Figure 4.6 (a) An outline life history 
for a unitary organism. Time passes along 
the horizontal axis, which is divided intodifferent phases. Reproductive output isplotted on the vertical axis. The ﬁgures
below (b–f ) are variations on this basictheme. (b) A semelparous annual species.(c) An iteroparous annual species. (d) A long-lived iteroparous species withseasonal breeding (that may indeed livemuch longer than suggested in the ﬁgure). (e) A long-lived species with continuousbreeding (that may again live much longer than suggested in the ﬁgure). 
(f ) A semelparous species living longerthan a year. The pre-reproductive phasemay be a little over 1 year (a biennialspecies, breeding in its second year) orlonger, often much longer, than this (as shown).EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 96•• ••LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 97
summarized diagrammatically in Figure 4.6, although there are
many life cycles that defy this simple classiﬁcation. Some organ-isms ﬁt several or many generations within a single year, somehave just one generation each year (annuals), and others have alife cycle extended over several or many years. For all organisms,
though, a period of growth occurs before there is any reproduc-tion, and growth usually slows down (and in some cases stopsaltogether) when reproduction starts.
Whatever the length of their life cycle, species may, broadly,
be either semelparous or iteroparous (often referred to by plant sci-
entists as monocarpic and polycarpic). In semelparous species, indi-
viduals have only a single, distinct period of reproductive output
in their lives, prior to which they have
largely ceased to grow, during which
they invest little or nothing in survivalto future reproductive events, and
after which they die. In iteroparous species, an individual normally experiences several or many such reproductive events,which may in fact merge into a single extended period of repro-ductive activity. During each period of reproductive activity theindividual continues to invest in future survival and possiblygrowth, and beyond each it therefore has a reasonable chance ofsurviving to reproduce again.
For example, many annual plants are semelparous (Figure 4.6b):
they have a sudden burst of ﬂowering and seed set, and then they die. This is commonly the case among the weeds of arablecrops. Others, such as groundsel ( Senecio vulgaris ), are iteroparous
(Figure 4.6c): they continue to grow and produce new ﬂowers
and seeds through the season until they are killed by the ﬁrst lethalfrost of winter. They die with their buds on.
There is also a marked seasonal rhythm in the lives of 
many long-lived iteroparous plants and animals, especially intheir reproductive activity: a period of reproduction once per year(Figure 4.6d). Mating (or the ﬂowering of plants) is commonlytriggered by the length of the photoperiod (see Section 2.3.7) and usually makes sure that young are born, eggs hatch or seedsare ripened when seasonal resources are likely to be abundant.Here, though, unlike annual species, the generations overlap andindividuals of a range of ages breed side by side. The population is maintained in part by survival of adults and in part by new births.
In wet equatorial regions, on the other hand, where there is
very little seasonal variation in temperature and rainfall andscarcely any variation in photoperiod, we ﬁnd species of plantsthat are in ﬂower and fruit throughout the year – and continu-ously breeding species of animal that subsist on this resource (Figure 4.6e). There are several species of ﬁg ( Ficus ), for instance,
that bear fruit continuously and form a reliable year-round foodsupply for birds and primates. In more seasonal climates, humansare unusual in also breeding continuously throughout the year,though numbers of other species, cockroaches, for example, do
so in the stable environments that humans have created.
Amongst long-lived (i.e. longer
than annual) semelparous plants(Figure 4.6f ), some are strictly biennial
– each individual takes two summersand the intervening winter to develop, but has only a single repro-ductive phase, in its second summer. An example is the white sweetclover, Melilotus alba . In New York State, this has relatively high
mortality during the ﬁrst growing season (whilst seedlings weredeveloping into established plants), followed by much lowermortality until the end of the second summer, when the plantsﬂowered and survivorship decreased rapidly. No plants surviveto a third summer. Thus, there is an overlap of two generations
at most (Klemow & Raynal, 1981). A more typical example of asemelparous species with overlapping generations is the compositeGrindelia lanceolata , which may ﬂower in its third, fourth or 
ﬁfth years. But whenever an individual does ﬂower, it dies soonafter.
A well-known example of a semelparous animal with overlap-
ping generations (Figure 4.6f ) is the Paciﬁc salmon Oncorhynchus
nerka . Salmon are spawned in rivers. They spend the ﬁrst phase
of their juvenile life in fresh water and then migrate to the sea,often traveling thousands of miles. At maturity they return to thestream in which they were hatched. Some mature and return toreproduce after only 2 years at sea; others mature more slowlyand return after 3, 4 or 5 years. At the time of reproduction the
population of salmon is composed of overlapping generations ofindividuals. But all are semelparous: they lay their eggs and thendie; their bout of reproduction is terminal.
There are even more dramatic examples of species that have
a long life but reproduce just once. Many species of bamboo formdense clones of shoots that remain vegetative for many years: up to 100 years in some species. The whole population of shoots,from the same and sometimes different clones, then ﬂowerssimultaneously in a mass suicidal orgy. Even when shoots havebecome physically separated from each other, the parts still ﬂowersynchronously.
In the following sections we look at the patterns of birth and
death in some of these life cycles in more detail, and at how thesepatterns are quantiﬁed. Often, in order to monitor and examinechanging patterns of mortality with age or stage, a life table is used.
This allows a survivorship curve to be constructed, which traces
the decline in numbers, over time, of a group of newly born ornewly emerged individuals or modules – or it can be thought ofas a plot of the probability, for a representative newly born indi-vidual, of surviving to various ages. Patterns of birth amongst individuals of different ages are often monitored at the same time as life tables are constructed. These patterns are displayedin fecundity schedules .
semelparous and
iteroparous life cyclesthe variety of lifecyclesEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 9798 CHAPTER 4
4.5 Annual species
Annual life cycles take approximately 12 months or rather less to
complete (Figure 4.6b, c). Usually, every individual in a popula-tion breeds during one particular season of the year, but then diesbefore the same season in the next year. Generations are there-fore said to be discrete, in that each generation is distinguishable
from every other; the only overlap of generations is between breed-ing adults and their offspring during and immediately after thebreeding season. Species with discrete generations need not beannual, since generation lengths other than 1 year are conceiv-able. In practice, however, most are: the regular annual cycle ofseasonal climates provides the major pressure in favor of synchrony.
4.5.1 Simple annuals: cohort life tables
A life table and fecundity schedule are set out in Table 4.1 for
the annual plant Phlox drummondii in Nixon, Texas (Leverich &
Levin, 1979). The life table is known as a cohort life table,because a single cohort of individuals (i.e. a group of individualsborn within the same short interval of time) was followed from
birth to the death of the last survivor. With an annual species likePhlox , there is no other way of constructing a life table. The life
cycle of Phlox was divided into a number of age classes. In other
cases, it is more appropriate to divide it into stages (e.g. insectswith eggs, larvae, pupae, etc.) or into size classes. The numberin the Phlox population was recorded on various occasions
before germination (i.e. when the plants were seeds), and then
again at regular intervals until all individuals had ﬂowered anddied. The advantage of using age classes is that it allows anobserver to look in detail at the patterns of birth and mortality
within stages (e.g. the seedling stage). The disadvantage is an 
individual’s age is not necessarily the best, nor even a satisfactory,measure of its biological ‘status’. In many long-lived plants, forinstance, individuals of the same age may be reproducing actively,or growing vegetatively but not reproducing, or doing neither.In such cases, a classiﬁcation based on developmental stages (asopposed to ages) is clearly appropriate. The decision to use ageclasses in Phlox was based on the small number of stages, the demo-
graphic variation within each and the synchronous development
of the whole population.
The ﬁrst column of Table 4.1 sets out
the various classes (in this case, ageclasses). The second column, a
x, then
lists the major part of the raw data: it gives the total number ofindividuals surviving to the start of each class ( a
0individuals in
the initial class, a63in the following one (which started on day 63),
and so on). The problem with any axcolumn is that its informa-
tion is speciﬁc to one population in 1 year, making comparisonswith other populations and other years very difﬁcult. The datahave therefore been standardized, next, in a column of l
xvalues.
This is headed by an l0value of 1.000, and all succeeding ﬁgures
have been brought into line accordingly (e.g. l124=1.000 ×295/
•• ••Table 4.1 A cohort life table for Phlox drummondii . The columns are explained in the text. (After Leverich & Levin, 1979.)
Proportion of original Proportion of original Mortality 
Age interval Number surviving cohort surviving cohort dying during rate per Daily killing 
(days) to day x to day x interval day powerx −x′ a
x lx dx qx Log10lx kx Fx mx lxmx
0–63 996 1.000 0.329 0.006 0.00 0.003 – – –
63–124 668 0.671 0.375 0.013 −0.17 0.006 – – –
124–184 295 0.296 0.105 0.007 −0.53 0.003 – – –
184–215 190 0.191 0.014 0.003 −0.72 0.001 – – –
215–264 176 0.177 0.004 0.002 −0.75 0.001 – – –
264–278 172 0.173 0.005 0.002 −0.76 0.001 – – –
278–292 167 0.168 0.008 0.004 −0.78 0.002 – – –
292–306 159 0.160 0.005 0.002 −0.80 0.001 53.0 0.33 0.05
306–320 154 0.155 0.007 0.003 −0.81 0.001 485.0 3.13 0.49
320–334 147 0.148 0.043 0.025 −0.83 0.011 802.7 5.42 0.80
334–348 105 0.105 0.083 0.106 −0.98 0.049 972.7 9.26 0.97
348–362 22 0.022 0.022 1.000 −1.66 – 94.8 4.31 0.10
362– 0 0.000 – – – – – – –
2408.2 2.41
R0= ∑lxmx= = 2.41.∑Fx
a0the columns of 
a life tableEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 98LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 99
996=0.296). Thus, whilst the a0value of 996 is peculiar to this
set of data, all studies have an l0value of 1.000, making all studies
comparable. The lxvalues are best thought of as the proportion
of the original cohort surviving to the start of a stage or age class.
To consider mortality more explicitly, the proportion of the
original cohort dying during each stage ( dx) is computed in the
next column, being simply the difference between successive 
values of lx; for example d124=0.296 −0.191 =0.105. The stage-
speciﬁc mortality rate,qx, is then computed. This considers dxas
a fraction of lx. Furthermore, the variable length of the age
classes makes it sensible to convert the qxvalues to ‘daily’ rates.
Thus, for instance, the fraction dying between days 124 and 184is 0.105/0.296 =0.355, which translates, on the basis of compound
‘interest’, into a daily rate or fraction, q
124, of 0.007. qxmay also
be thought of as the average ‘chance’ or probability of an indi-vidual dying during an interval. It is therefore equivalent to (1−p
x) where p refers to the probability of survival.
The advantage of the dxvalues is that they can be summed:
thus, the proportion of the cohort dying in the ﬁrst 292 days (essen-tially the prereproductive stage) was d
0+d63+d124...+d278(=0.840).
The disadvantage is that the individual values give no real ideaof the intensity or importance of mortality during a particular stage.This is because the d
xvalues are larger the more individuals there
are, and hence the more there are available to die. The qxvalues,
on the other hand, are an excellent measure of the intensity ofmortality. For instance, in the present example it is clear fromthe q
xcolumn that the mortality rate increased markedly in the
second period; this is not clear from the dxcolumn. The qxvalues,
however, have the disadvantage that, for example, summing thevalues over the ﬁrst 292 days gives no idea of the mortality rateover that period.
The advantages are combined, how-
ever, in the next column of the life
table, which contains k
xvalues (Haldane,
1949; Varley & Gradwell, 1970). kxis deﬁned simply as the dif-
ference between successive values of log10axor successive values
of log10lx(they amount to the same thing), and is sometimes referred
to as a ‘killing power’. Like qxvalues , kxvalues reﬂect the inten-
sity or rate of mortality (as Table 4.1 shows); but unlike summing
theqxvalues, summing kxvalues is a legitimate procedure . Thus,
the killing power or k value for the ﬁnal 28 days is (0.011 ×14)+
(0.049 ×14)=0.84, which is also the difference between −0.83 and
−1.66 (allowing for rounding errors). Note too that like lxvalues,
kxvalues are standardized, and are therefore appropriate for
comparing quite separate studies. In this and later chapters, kx
values will be used repeatedly.
4.5.2 Fecundity schedules and basic reproductive rates
The fecundity schedule in Table 4.1 (the ﬁnal three columns) beginswith a column of raw data, F
x: the total number of seeds producedduring each period. This is followed in the next column by mx:
the individual fecundity or birth rate, i.e. the mean number ofseeds produced per surviving individual. Although the repro-ductive season for the Phlox population lasts for 56 days, each 
individual plant is semelparous. It has a single reproductive
phase during which all of its seeds develop synchronously (or nearlyso). The extended reproductive season occurs because differentindividuals enter this phase at different times.
Perhaps the most important summary term that can be
extracted from a life table and fecundity schedule is the basic repro-ductive rate, denoted by R
0. This is the mean number of offspring
(of the ﬁrst stage in the life cycle – in this case seeds) produced
per original individual by the end of the cohort. It therefore indicates, in annual species, the overall extent by which the population has increased or decreased over that time. (As we 
shall see below, the situation becomes more complicated whengenerations overlap or species breed continuously.)
There are two ways in which R
0
can be computed. The ﬁrst is from the
formula:
R0=∑ Fx/a0, (4.2)
i.e. the total number of seeds produced during one generationdivided by the original number of seeds ( ∑F
xmeans the sum of
the values in the Fxcolumn). The more usual way of calculating
R0, however, is from the formula:
R0=∑ lxmx, (4.3)
i.e. the sum of the number of seeds produced per original indi-vidual during each of the stages (the ﬁnal column of the fecun-
dity schedule). As Table 4.1 shows, the basic reproductive rate isthe same, whichever formula is used.
The age-speciﬁc fecundity, m
x(the fecundity per surviving 
individual), demonstrates the existence of a preproductive period,
a gradual rise to a peak and then a rapid decline. The reproduc-tive output of the whole population, F
x, parallels this pattern to
a large extent, but also takes into account the fact that whilst the age-speciﬁc fecundity was changing, the size of the popula-tion was gradually declining. This combination of fecundity and survivorship is an important property of F
xvalues, shared by the
basic reproductive rate ( R0). It makes the point that actual repro-
duction depends both on reproductive potential ( mx) and on 
survivorship ( lx).
In the case of the Phlox population, R0was 2.41. This means
that there was a 2.41-fold increase in the size of the populationover one generation. If such a value were maintained from generation to generation, the Phlox population would grow ever
larger and soon cover the globe. Thus, a balanced and realistic
picture of the life and death of Phlox , or any other species, can
only emerge from several or many years’ data.
•• ••kvaluesthe basic reproductive
rate, R0EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 99100 CHAPTER 4
4.5.3 Survivorship curves
The pattern of mortality in the Phlox population is illustrated in
Figure 4.7a using both qxand kxvalues. The mortality rate was
fairly high at the beginning of the seed stage but became very
low towards the end. Then, amongst the adults, there was a periodwhere the mortality rate ﬂuctuated about a moderate level, fol-lowed ﬁnally by a sharp increase to very high levels during the
last weeks of the generation. The same pattern is shown in a different form in Figure 4.7b. This is a survivorship curve, andfollows the decline of log
10lxwith age. When the mortality rate
is roughly constant, the survivorship curve is more or less
straight; when the rate increases, the curve is convex; and whenthe rate decreases, the curve is concave. Thus, the curve is con-cave towards the end of the seed stage, and convex towards the
end of the generation. Survivorship curves are the most widelyused way of depicting patterns of mortality.
The y-axis in Figure 4.7b is loga-
rithmic. The importance of using loga-rithms in survivorship curves can beseen by imagining two investigations of
the same population. In the ﬁrst, the whole population is censused:there is a decline in one time interval from 1000 to 500 individuals.In the second, samples are taken, and over the same time interval
this index of density declines from 100 to 50. The two cases arebiologically identical, i.e. the rate or probability of death per individual over the time interval (the per capita rate) is the same.
The slopes of the two logarithmic survivorship curves reﬂect this: both would be −0.301. But on simple linear scales the slopeswould differ. Logarithmic survivorship curves therefore have the
advantage of being standardized from study to study, just like the ‘rates’ q
x, kxand mx. Plotting numbers on a logarithmic scale
will also indicate when per capita rates of increase are identical.
‘Log numbers’ will therefore often be used in preference to‘numbers’ when numerical change is being plotted.
4.5.4 A classiﬁcation of survivorship curves
Life tables provide a great deal of data on speciﬁc organisms. But ecologists search for generalities: patterns of life and deaththat we can see repeated in the lives of many species. A usefulset of survivorship curves was developed long ago by Pearl(1928) whose three types generalize what we know about the 
way in which the risks of death are distributed through the lives of different organisms (Figure 4.8). Type I describes the situation in which mortality is concentrated toward the end ofthe maximum lifespan. It is perhaps most typical of humans in developed countries and their carefully tended zoo animals and pets. Type II is a straight line that describes a constant mortality rate from birth to maximum age. It describes, forinstance, the survival of seeds buried in the soil. Type III indi-cates extensive early mortality, but a high rate of subsequent 
survival. This is typical of species that produce many offspring.Few survive initially, but once individuals reach a critical size, their risk of death remains low and more or less constant. Thisappears to be the most common survivorship curve among animals and plants in nature.
•• ••0.11
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06qx and kx
kxqx
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
100 200 300(a)
Days0
–1
–2
0Log10/x
100 200 300(b)
DaysFigure 4.7 Mortality and survivorship 
in the life cycle of Phlox drummondii . 
(a) The age-speciﬁc daily mortality rate 
(qx) and daily killing power ( kx). (b) The
survivorship curve: log10lxplotted against
age. (After Leverich & Levin, 1979.)the logarithmic scale
in survivorship curvesEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 100LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 101
These types of survivorship curve are useful generalizations,
but in practice, patterns of survival are usually more complex. Thus,
in a population of Erophila verna , a very short-lived annual plant
inhabiting sand dunes, survival can follow a type I curve whenthe plants grow at low densities; a type II curve, at least until the
end of the lifespan, at medium densities; and a type III curve inthe early stages of life at the highest densities (Figure 4.9).
4.5.5 Seed banks, ephemerals and other 
not-quite-annuals
Using Phlox as an example of an annual plant has, to a certain
extent, been misleading, because the group of seedlings developing
in 1 year is a true cohort: it derives entirely from seed set by adultsin the previous year. Seeds that do not germinate in 1 year willnot survive till the next. In most ‘annual’ plants this is not the
case. Instead, seeds accumulate in the soil in a buried seed bank .
At any one time, therefore, seeds of a variety of ages are likelyto occur together in the seed bank, and when they germinate theseedlings will also be of varying ages (age being the length of timesince the seed was ﬁrst produced). The formation of somethingcomparable to a seed bank is rarer amongst animals, but there areexamples to be seen amongst the eggs of nematodes, mosquitoes
and fairy shrimps, the gemmules of sponges and the statocysts ofbryozoans.
Note that species commonly referred to as ‘annual’, but with
a seed bank (or animal equivalent), are not strictly annual species
at all, even if they progress from germination to reproduction within1 year, since some of the seeds destined to germinate each yearwill already be more than 12 months old. All we can do, though,is bear this fact in mind, and note that it is just one example of real organisms spoiling our attempts to ﬁt them neatly into clear-cut categories.
•• ••100
10Survivorship
Age1
0.1Type I
Type II
Type III1000
Figure 4.8 A classiﬁcation of survivorship curves. Type I
(convex) – epitomized perhaps by humans in rich countries,
cosseted animals in a zoo or leaves on a plant – describes thesituation in which mortality is concentrated at the end of themaximum lifespan. Type II (straight) indicates that the probability
of death remains constant with age, and may well apply to the buried seed banks of many plant populations. Type III(concave) indicates extensive early mortality, with those thatremain having a high rate of survival subsequently. This is true,for example, of many marine ﬁsh, which produce millions of eggs of which very few survive to become adults. (After Pearl,1928; Deevey, 1947.)0 5 10 15 20 25Survivorship (lx) Low density1000
750
500
250
50100
0 5 10 15 20 25Survivorship (lx)
Plant ageHigh density1000
750
500
250
50100Medium density
0 5 10 15 20 25Survivorship (lx)1000
750
500
250
50100
Figure 4.9 Survivorship curves ( lx, where l0=1000) for the 
sand-dune annual plant Erophila verna monitored at three densities:
high (initially 55 or more seedlings per 0.01 m2plot); medium
(15–30 seedlings per plot); and low (1–2 seedlings per plot). The
horizontal scale (plant age) is standardized to take account of thefact that each curve is the average of several cohorts, which lasteddifferent lengths of time (around 70 days on average). (After
Symonides, 1983.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 101102 CHAPTER 4
As a general rule, dormant seeds,
which enter and make a signiﬁcant
contribution to seed banks, are morecommon in annuals and other short-lived plant species than they are in
longer lived species, such that short-lived species tend to pre-
dominate in buried seed banks, even when most of the establishedplants above them belong to much longer lived species. Certainly,the species composition of seed banks and the mature vegetationabove may be very different (Figure 4.10).
Annual species with seed banks are not the only ones for which
the term annual is, strictly speaking, inappropriate. For example,there are many annual plant species living in deserts that are farfrom seasonal in their appearance. They have a substantial buried
seed bank, with germination occurring on rare occasions after substantial rainfall. Subsequent development is usually rapid, sothat the period from germination to seed production is short. Such plants are best described as semelparous ephemerals .A simple annual label also fails to ﬁt species where the major-
ity of individuals in each generation are annual, but where a small
number postpone reproduction until their second summer. Thisapplies, for example, to the terrestrial isopod Philoscia muscorum
living in northeast England (Sunderland et al., 1976). Approximately
90% of females bred only in the ﬁrst summer after they were born;
the other 10% bred only in their second summer. In some otherspecies, the difference in numbers between those that reproducein their ﬁrst or second years is so slight that the descriptionannual–biennial is most appropriate.
In short, it is clear that annual life cycles merge into more 
complex ones without any sharp discontinuity.
4.6 Individuals with repeated breeding seasons
Many species breed repeatedly (assuming they survive long
enough), but nevertheless have a speciﬁc breeding season. Thus,they have overlapping generations (see Figure 4.6d). Amongst themore obvious examples are temperate-region birds living formore than 1 year, some corals, most trees and other iteroparous
perennial plants. In these, individuals of a range of ages breed sideby side. None the less, some species in this category, some grassesfor example, and many birds, live for relatively short periods.
4.6.1 Cohort life tables
Constructing a cohort life table for species that breed repeatedly
is more difﬁcult than constructing one for an annual species. A cohort must be recognized and followed (often for manyyears), even though the organisms within it are coexisting andintermingling with organisms from many other cohorts, older and
younger. This was possible, though, as part of an extensive studyof red deer ( Cervus elaphus ) on the small island of Rhum, Scotland
(Lowe, 1969). The deer live for up to 16 years, and the females(hinds) are capable of breeding each year from their fourth summeronwards. In 1957, Lowe and his coworkers made a very carefulcount of the total number of deer on the island, including the totalnumber of calves (less than 1 year old). Lowe’s cohort consistedof the deer that were calves in 1957. Thus, each year from 1957to 1966, every one of the deer that was discovered that had died
from natural causes, or had been shot under the rigorously con-trolled conditions of this Nature Conservancy Council reserve,was examined and aged reliably by examining tooth replace-ment, eruption and wear. It was therefore possible to identify thosedead deer that had been calves in 1957; and by 1966, 92% of thiscohort had been observed dead and their age at death thereforedetermined. The life table for this cohort of hinds (or the 92%sample of it) is presented in Table 4.2; the survivorship curve isshown in Figure 4.11. There appears to be a fairly consistent increasein the risk of mortality with age (the curve is convex).
•• ••Seed bank
Mature vegetationGermination
GR6
29Seedlings
GR49GR34
GR1
21
GR7
19GR213GR517
Seed rain Seed rainEstablishment
Figure 4.10 Species recovered from the seed bank, from
seedlings and from mature vegetation in a coastal grassland 
site on the western coast of Finland. Seven species groups(GR1–GR7) are deﬁned on the basis of whether they were found in only one, two, or all three stages. GR3 (seed bank 
and seedlings only) is an unreliable group of species that aremostly incompletely identiﬁed; in GR5 there are many speciesdifﬁcult to identify as seedlings that may more properly belong to GR1. None the less, the marked difference in composition,especially between the seed bank and the mature vegetation, isreadily apparent. (After Jutila, 2003.)the species
composition of seedbanksEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 102LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 103
4.6.2 Static life tables
The difﬁculties of constructing a cohort life table for an organism
with overlapping generations are eased somewhat when theorganism is sessile. In such a case, newly arrived or newly emergedindividuals can be mapped, photographed or even marked in some
way, so that they (or their exact location) can be recognized when-ever the site is revisited subsequently. Taken overall, however,practical problems have tended to deter ecologists from constructingcohort life tables for long-lived iteroparous organisms with over-lapping generations, even when the individuals are sessile. But thereis an alternative: the construction of a static life table. As will
become clear, this alternative is seriously ﬂawed – but it is oftenbetter than nothing at all.
An interesting example emerges from Lowe’s study of red deer
on Rhum. As has already been explained, a large proportion ofthe deer that died from 1957 to 1966 could be aged reliably. Thus,if, for example, a fresh corpse was examined in 1961 and was foundto be 6 years old, it was known that in 1957 the deer was aliveand 2 years old. Lowe was therefore eventually able to reconstructthe age structure of the 1957 population: age structures are thebasis for static life tables. Of course, the age structure of the 1957 population could have been ascertained by shooting and examining large numbers of deer in 1957; but since the ultimateaim of the project was the enlightened conservation of the deer,
this method would have been somewhat inappropriate. (Note that Lowe’s results did not represent the total numbers alive in 1957, because a few carcasses must have decomposed or been eaten before they could be discovered and examined.)Lowe’s raw data for red deer hinds are presented in column 2 of Table 4.3.
Remember that the data in Table 4.3 refer to ages in 1957. They
can be used as a basis for a life table, but only if it is assumedthat there had been no year-to-year variation prior to 1957 in either
the total number of births or the age-speciﬁc survival rates. In otherwords, it must be assumed that the 59 6-year-old deer alive in1957 were the survivors of 78 5-year-old deer alive in 1956, whowere themselves the survivors of 81 4-year olds in 1955, and soon. Or, in short, that the data in Table 4.3 are the same as wouldhave been obtained if a single cohort hadbeen followed.
•• ••Proportion of original Proportion of original 
cohort surviving to the cohort dying during 
Age (years) beginning of age-class x age-class x Mortality rate
xlx dx qx
1 1.000 0 02 1.000 0.061 0.0613 0.939 0.185 0.1974 0.754 0.249 0.3305 0.505 0.200 0.3966 0.305 0.119 0.3907 0.186 0.054 0.2908 0.132 0.107 0.8109 0.025 0.025 1.000Table 4.2 Cohort life table for red deer
hinds on the island of Rhum that were
calves in 1957. (After Lowe, 1969.)
1000
500
400
300
200
100
50
40
30
20
10
5
4
3
2
123456789101112131415
Age (years)Yearling hinds on Rhum
in 1957 (cohort)Survivors per thousand yearlings Hinds on Rhumin 1957 (static)
Figure 4.11 Two survivorship curves for red deer hinds on 
the island of Rhum. As explained in the text, one is based on 
the cohort life table for the 1957 calves and therefore applies to the post-1957 period; the other is based on the static life table of the 1957 population and therefore applies to the 
pre-1957 period. (After Lowe, 1969.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 103•• ••104 CHAPTER 4
Having made these assumptions,
the lx,dxand qxcolumns were con-
structed. It is clear, however, that the
assumptions are false. There wereactually more animals in their seventh
year than in their sixth year, and more in their 15th year than 
in their 14th year. There were therefore ‘negative’ deaths and meaningless mortality rates. The pitfalls of constructing suchstatic life tables (and equating age structures with survivorshipcurves) are amply illustrated.
Nevertheless, the data can be useful. Lowe’s aim was to pro-
vide a general idea of the population’s age-speciﬁc survival rate
prior to 1957 (when culling of the population began). He couldthen compare this with the situation after 1957, as illustrated bythe cohort life table previously discussed. He was more concerned
with general trends than with the particular changes occurringfrom 1 year to the next. He therefore ‘smoothed out’ the vari-ations in numbers between ages 2–8 and 10–16 years to give asteady decline during both of these periods. The results of thisprocess are shown in the ﬁnal three columns of Table 4.3, andthe survivorship curve is plotted in Figure 4.11. A general picturedoes indeed emerge: the introduction of culling on the islandappears to have decreased overall survivorship signiﬁcantly, over-coming any possible compensatory decreases in natural mortality.
Notwithstanding this successful use of a static life table, the
interpretation of static life tables generally, and the age structuresfrom which they stem, is fraught with difﬁculty: usually, age struc-tures offer no easy short cuts to understanding the dynamics of
populations.4.6.3 Fecundity schedules
Static fecundity schedules , i.e. age-speciﬁc variations in fecundity
within a particular season, can also provide useful information,
especially if they are available from successive breeding seasons.We can see this for a population of great tits ( Parus major ) in
Wytham Wood, near Oxford, UK (Table 4.4), where the data could
be obtained only because the individual birds could be aged (in this case, because they had been marked with individually recognizable leg-rings soon after hatching). The table shows thatmean fecundity rose to a peak in 2-year-old birds and declinedgradually thereafter. Indeed, most iteroparous species show an age- or stage-related pattern of fecundity. For instance, Figure 4.12shows the size-dependent fecundity of moose ( Alces alces ) in
Sweden.
4.6.4 The importance of modularity
The sedge Carex bigelowii , growing in a lichen heath in Norway,
illustrates the difﬁculties of constructing any sort of life table for
organisms that are not only iteroparous with overlapping gen-erations but are also modular (Figure 4.13). Carex bigelowii has 
an extensive underground rhizome system that produces tillers
(aerial shoots) at intervals along its length as it grows. It growsby producing a lateral meristem in the axil of a leaf belonging to a ‘parent’ tiller. This lateral is completely dependent on theparent tiller at ﬁrst, but is potentially capable of developing intoa vegetative parent tiller itself, and also of ﬂowering, which it doesNumber of individuals Smoothed
Age (years) observed of age x
xax lx dx qx lx dx qx
1 129 1.000 0.116 0.116 1.000 0.137 0.1372 114 0.884 0.008 0.009 0.863 0.085 0.0973 113 0.876 0.251 0.287 0.778 0.084 0.1084 81 0.625 0.020 0.032 0.694 0.084 0.1215 78 0.605 0.148 0.245 0.610 0.084 0.1376 59 0.457 0.047 – 0.526 0.084 0.1597 65 0.504 0.078 0.155 0.442 0.085 0.1908 55 0.426 0.232 0.545 0.357 0.176 0.5029 25 0.194 0.124 0.639 0.181 0.122 0.672
10 9 0.070 0.008 0.114 0.059 0.008 0.14111 8 0.062 0.008 0.129 0.051 0.009 0.16512 7 0.054 0.038 0.704 0.042 0.008 0.19813 2 0.016 0.008 0.500 0.034 0.009 0.24714 1 0.080 −0.023 – 0.025 0.008 0.329
15 4 0.031 0.015 0.484 0.017 0.008 0.49216 2 0.016 – – 0.009 0.009 1.000Table 4.3 A static life table for red deer
hinds on the island of Rhum, based on 
the reconstructed age structure of thepopulation in 1957. (After Lowe, 1969.)
static life tables: 
ﬂawed but sometimesuseful, none the lessEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 104••LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 105
when it has produced a total of 16 or more leaves. Flowering,
however, is always followed by tiller death, i.e. the tillers are semel-parous although the genets are iteroparous.
Callaghan (1976) took a number of well-separated young
tillers, and excavated their rhizome systems through progressively
older generations of parent tillers. This was made possible by thepersistence of dead tillers. He excavated 23 such systems containinga total of 360 tillers, and was able to construct a type of static life table (and fecundity schedule) based on the growth stages(Figure 4.13). There were, for example, 1.04 dead vegetativetillers (per m
2) with 31–35 leaves. Thus, since there were also 
0.26 tillers in the next (36–40 leaves) stage, it can be assumed 
that a total of 1.30 (i.e. 1.04 +0.26) living vegetative tillers
entered the 31–35 leaf stage. As there were 1.30 vegetative tillersand 1.56 ﬂowering tillers in the 31–35 leaf stage, 2.86 tillers must
have survived from the 26–30 stage. It is in this way that the life table – applicable not to individual genets but to tillers (i.e.
modules) – was constructed.
There appeared to be no new establishment from seed in 
this particular population (no new genets); tiller numbers werebeing maintained by modular growth alone. However, a ‘modulargrowth schedule’ ( laterals ), analogous to a fecundity schedule, has
been constructed.
Note ﬁnally that stages rather than age classes have been used
here – something that is almost always necessary when dealing
with modular iteroparous organisms, because variability stemmingfrom modular growth accumulates year upon year, making agea particularly poor measure of an individual’s chances of death,reproduction or further modular growth.
4.7 Reproductive rates, generation lengths 
and rates of increase
4.7.1 Relationships between the variables
In the previous section we saw that the life tables and fecundity
schedules drawn up for species with overlapping generations are at least superﬁcially similar to those constructed for specieswith discrete generations. With discrete generations, we were ableto compute the basic reproductive rate ( R
0) as a summary term
describing the overall outcome of the patterns of survivorship andfecundity. Can a comparable summary term be computed whengenerations overlap?
Note immediately that previously, for species with discrete 
generations, R
0described two separate population parameters. It
was the number of offspring produced on average by an individualover the course of its life; but it was also the multiplication fac-tor that converted an original population size into a new popu-lation size, one generation hence. With overlapping generations,
when a cohort life table is available, the basic reproductive ratecan be calculated using the same formula:
R
0=∑ lxmx, (4.4)
••Table 4.4 Mean clutch size and age of great tits in Wytham Wood, near Oxford, UK. (After Perrins, 1965.)
1961 1962 1963
Age (years) Number of birds Mean clutch size Number of birds Mean clutch size Number of birds Mean clutch size
Yearlings 128 7.7 54 8.5 54 9.4
2 18 8.5 43 9.0 33 10.03 14 8.3 12 8.8 29 9.74 5 8.2 9 9.75 1 8.0 2 9.56 1 9.0Litter size (offspring female–1)
0.00.40.81.21.6
Female age (years)0 5 10 15 20
Figure 4.12 Age-dependent reproduction (average litter size) in a
population of moose ( Alces alces ) in Sweden (means with standard
errors). (After Ericsson et al. , 2001.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 105106 CHAPTER 4
and it still refers to the average number of offspring produced 
by an individual. But further manipulations of the data are neces-sary before we can talk about the rate at which a populationincreases or decreases in size – or, for that matter, about the length of a generation. The difﬁculties are much greater still when
only a static life table (i.e. an age structure) is available (seebelow).
We begin by deriving a general relationship that links popula-
tion size, the rate of population increase, and time – but whichis not limited to measuring time in terms of generations.Imagine a population that starts with 10 individuals, and which,after successive intervals of time, rises to 20, 40, 80, 160 indi-viduals and so on. We refer to the initial population size as N
0
(meaning the population size when no time has elapsed). The 
population size after one time interval is N1, after two time inter-
vals it is N2, and in general after t time intervals it is Nt. In the
present case, N0=10, N1=20, and we can say that:
N1=N0R, (4.5)
where R, which is 2 in the present
case, is known as the fundamental net
reproductive rate or the fundamental net
per capita rate of increase . Clearly, popu-
lations will increase when R>1, and decrease when R<1.
(Unfortunately, the ecological literature is somewhat divided
between those who use ‘ R’ and those who use the symbol λfor
the same parameter. Here we stick with R, but we sometimesuse λin later chapters to conform to standard usage within the
topic concerned.)
Rcombines the birth of new individuals with the survival 
of existing individuals. Thus, when R=2, each individual could
give rise to two offspring but die itself, or give rise to only one
offspring and remain alive: in either case, R(birth plus survival)
would be 2. Note too that in the present case Rremains the same
over the successive intervals of time, i.e. N2=40=N1R, N3=80
=N2R, and so on. Thus:
N3=N1R×R=N0R×R×R=N0R3, (4.6)
and in general terms:
Nt+1=NtR, (4.7)
and:
Nt=N0Rt. (4.8)
Equations 4.7 and 4.8 link together
population size, rate of increase and
time; and we can now link these in turn with R0, the basic 
reproductive rate, and with the generation length (deﬁned as 
lasting Tintervals of time). In Section 4.5.2, we saw that R0 is 
the multiplication factor that converts one population size to
another population size, one generation later, i.e. Ttime intervals
later. Thus:
•• ••23.9023.9016.90
43.6346.630.23
19.7519.7521.56
4.0318.1917.935.89
0.26
0.26
4.0316.3713.770.65
2.60
2.60
52.706.23
11.439.09
2.34
2.34
35.041.04
2.861.30
1.56
1.56
29.600.26
0.26
0.26
5.98Vegetative
tillers
Surviving
tillersLaterals
Flowering
tillers
Seeds
6–10 0–5 11–15 18–20 21–25 26–30 31–35 36–40
Number of leaves per tiller52.70 35.04 29.60 5.984.15 19.73 1.56 1.56 2.34
Figure 4.13 A reconstructed static life
table for the modules (tillers) of a Carex
bigelowii population. The densities per m2
of tillers are shown in rectangular boxes,
and those of seeds in diamond-shapedboxes. Rows represent tiller types, whilstcolumns depict size classes of tillers. Thin-walled boxes represent dead tiller 
(or seed) compartments, and arrowsdenote pathways between size classes,death or reproduction. (After Callaghan,1976.)
the fundamental net
reproductive rate, RR, R0and TEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 106LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 107
NT=N0R0. (4.9)
But we can see from Equation 4.8 that:
NT=N0RT. (4.10)
Therefore:
R0=RT, (4.11)
or, if we take natural logarithms of both sides:
ln R0=Tln R. (4.12)
The term ln Ris usually denoted 
by r, the intrinsic rate of natural increase .
It is the rate at which the population 
increases in size, i.e. the change in population size per individual
per unit time. Clearly, populations will increase in size for r>0,
and decrease for r<0; and we can note from the preceding equa-
tion that:
r=ln R0/T. (4.13)
Summarizing so far, we have a relationship between the 
average number of offspring produced by an individual in its life-time, R
0, the increase in population size per unit time, r (=ln R),
and the generation time, T. Previously, with discrete generations
(see Section 4.5.2), the unit of time was a generation. It was for
this reason that R0was the same as R.
4.7.2 Estimating the variables from life tables 
and fecundity schedules
In populations with overlapping generations (or continuous breed-
ing), ris the intrinsic rate of natural increase that the population
has the potential to achieve; but it will only actually achieve 
this rate of increase if the survivorship and fecundity schedulesremain steady over a long period of time. If they do, rwill be
approached gradually (and thereafter maintained), and over 
the same period the population will gradually approach a stable age structure (i.e. one in which the proportion of the populationin each age class remains constant over time; see below). If, onthe other hand, the fecundity and survivorship schedules alter overtime – as they almost always do – then the rate of increase willcontinually change, and it will be impossible to characterize in asingle ﬁgure. Nevertheless, it can often be useful to characterizea population in terms of its potential, especially when the aim is
to make a comparison, for instance comparing various popula-tions of the same species in different environments, to see whichenvironment appears to be the most favorable for the species.The most precise way to calculate ris from the equation:
∑e
−rxlxmx=1, (4.14)
where the lxand mxvalues are taken from a cohort life table, and
e is the base of natural logarithms. However, this is a so-called
‘implicit’ equation, which cannot be solved directly (only by iteration, usually on a computer), and it is an equation withoutany clear biological meaning. It is therefore customary to use instead
an approximation to Equation 4.13, namely:
r≈ln R
0/Tc, (4.15)
where Tcis the cohort generation time (see below). This equation
shares with Equation 4.13 the advantage of making explicit the
dependence of ron the reproductive output of individuals ( R0)
and the length of a generation ( T). Equation 4.15 is a good
approximation when R0≈1 (i.e. population size stays approximately
constant), or when there is little variation in generation length,or for some combination of these two things (May, 1976).
We can estimate rfrom Equation 4.15 if we know the value
of the cohort generation time T
c, which is the average length 
of time between the birth of an individual and the birth of one of its own offspring. This, being an average, is the sum of all these birth-to-birth times, divided by the total number of offspring, i.e.:
T
c=∑ xlxmx/∑lxmx
or
Tc=∑ xlxmx/R0. (4.16)
This is only approximately equal to the true generation time T,
because it takes no account of the fact that some offspring may
themselves develop and give birth during the reproductive life ofthe parent.
Thus Equations 4.15 and 4.16 allow us to calculate T
c, and thus
an approximate value for r, from a cohort life table of a popula-
tion with either overlapping generations or continuous breeding.
In short, they give us the summary terms we require. A workedexample is set out in Table 4.5, using data for the barnacle
Balanus glandula . Note that the precise value of r, from Equation
4.14, is 0.085, compared to the approximation 0.080; whilst T, 
calculated from Equation 4.13, is 2.9 years compared to T
c=3.1
years. The simpler and biologically transparent approximations
are clearly satisfactory in this case. They show that since r
was somewhat greater than zero, the population would haveincreased in size, albeit rather slowly, if the schedules had
remained steady. Alternatively, we may say that, as judged by thiscohort life table, the barnacle population had a good chance of continued existence.
•• ••r, the intrinsic rate of
natural increaseEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 107108 CHAPTER 4
4.7.3 The population projection matrix
A more general, more powerful, and therefore more useful
method of analyzing and interpreting the fecundity and survivalschedules of a population with overlapping generations makes useof the population projection matrix (see Caswell, 2001, for a fullexposition). The word ‘projection’ in its title is important. Just
like the simpler methods above, the idea is not to take the cur-rent state of a population and forecast what will happen to the
population in the future, but to project forward to what would
happen if the schedules remained the same. Caswell uses the 
analogy of the speedometer in a car: it provides us with aninvaluable piece of information about the car’s current state, buta reading of, say, 80 km h
−1is simply a projection, not a serious
forecast that we will actually have traveled 80 km in 1 hour’s time.
The population projection matrix
acknowledges that most life cycles
comprise a sequence of distinct classes
with different rates of fecundity and survival: life cycle stages, perhaps, or size classes, rather than simply different ages. The result-ant patterns can be summarized in a ‘life cycle graph’, though thisis not a graph in the everyday sense but a ﬂow diagram depict-ing the transitions from class to class over each step in time. Twoexamples are shown in Figure 4.14 (see also Caswell, 2001). Theﬁrst (Figure 4.14a) indicates a straightforward sequence of classeswhere, over each time step, individuals in class imay: (i) survive
and remain in that class (with probability p
i); (ii) survive and grow
and/or develop into the next class (with probability gi); and 
(iii) give birth to minewborn individuals into the youngest/
smallest class. Moreover, as Figure 4.14b shows, a life cycle graph
can also depict a more complex life cycle, for example with bothsexual reproduction (here, from reproductive class 4 into ‘seed’class 1) and vegetative growth of new modules (here, from
‘mature module’ class 3 to ‘new module’ class 2). Note that thenotation here is slightly different from that in life tables likeTable 4.1 above. There the focus was on age classes, and the passage of time inevitably meant the passing of individuals fromone age class to the next: pvalues therefore referred to survival
from one age class to the next. Here, by contrast, an individual
•• ••life cycle graphs
(b)
1
p12
p23
p34
p4g1 g2m3
g3m4p1 00 m4
g1 p2m3 0
0 g2p3 0
00 g3 p4(a)
1
p12
p23
p34
p4g1m2
g2 g3p1m2m3m4
g1 p200
0 g2p3 0
00 g3 p4m3m4Table 4.5 A cohort life table and a fecundity schedule for 
the barnacle Balanus glandula at Pile Point, San Juan Island,
Washington (Connell, 1970). The computations for R0, Tcand the
approximate value of rare explained in the text. Numbers marked
with an asterisk were interpolated from the survivorship curve.
Age (years)
xax lx mx lxmx xlxmx
0 1,000,000 1.000 0 01 62 0.0000620 4,600 0.285 0.2852 34 0.0000340 8,700 0.296 0.5923 20 0.0000200 11,600 0.232 0.6964 15.5 * 0.0000155 12,700 0.197 0.788
5 11 0.000110 12,700 0.140 0.7006 6.5 * 0.0000065 12,700 0.082 0.492
7 2 0.0000020 12,700 0.025 0.175
8 2 0.0000020 12,700 0.025 0.200
1.282 3.928
R0=1.282; Tc== 3.1; r≈= 0.08014.ln R0
Tc3.9281.282
Figure 4.14 Life cycle graphs and
population projection matrices for two
different life cycles. The connectionbetween the graphs and the matrices isexplained in the text. (a) A life cycle with
four successive classes. Over one time step,individuals may survive within the sameclass (with probability p
i), survive and 
pass to the next class (with probability gi)
or die, and individuals in classes 2, 3 
and 4 may give birth to individuals in class 1 (with per capita fecundity m
i). 
(b) Another life cycle with four classes, but in this case only reproductive class 4 individuals can give birth to class 1individuals, but class 3 individuals can 
‘give birth’ (perhaps by vegetative growth)to further class 2 individuals.EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 108LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 109
need not pass from one class to the next over a time step, and 
it is therefore necessary to distinguish survival within a class (pvalues here) from passage and survival into the next class 
(gvalues).
The information in a life cycle
graph can be summarized in a popula-
tion projection matrix. Such matrices are shown alongside the graphs in
Figure 4.14. The convention is to contain the elements of amatrix within square brackets. In fact, a projection matrix is itselfalways ‘square’: it has the same number of columns as rows. Therows refer to the class number at the endpoint of a transition:the columns refer to the class number at the start. Thus, forinstance, the matrix element in the third row of the second 
column describes the ﬂow of individuals from the second classinto the third class. More speciﬁcally, then, and using the life cyclein Figure 4.14a as an example, the elements in the main diago-nal from top left to bottom right represent the probabilities ofsurviving and remaining in the same class (the ps), the elements
in the remainder of the ﬁrst row represent the fecundities of each subsequent class into the youngest class (the ms), while the
gs, the probabilities of surviving and moving to the next class, 
appear in the subdiagonal below the main diagonal (from 1 to 2,from 2 to 3, etc).
Summarizing the information in this way is useful because,
using standard rules of matrix manipulation, we can take the num-bers in the different classes ( n
1, n2, etc.) at one point in time ( t1),
expressed as a ‘column vector’ (simply a matrix comprising just
one column), pre-multiply this vector by the projection matrix,
and generate the numbers in the different classes one time steplater ( t
2). The mechanics of this – that is, where each element of
the new column vector comes from – are as follows:Thus, the numbers in the ﬁrst class,
n1, are the survivors from that class
one time step previously plus thoseborn into it from the other classes, and so on. Figure 4.15 showsthis process repeated 20 times (i.e. for 20 time steps) with somehypothetical values in the projection matrix shown as an inset in
the ﬁgure. It is apparent that there is an initial (transient) periodin which the proportions in the different classes alter, someincreasing and others decreasing, but that after about nine timesteps, all classes grow at the same exponential rate (a straight lineon a logarithmic scale), and so therefore does the whole popula-tion. The Rvalue is 1.25. Also, the proportions in the different
classes are constant: the population has achieved a stable class structure with numbers in the ratios 51.5 : 14.7 : 3.8 : 1.
Hence, a population projection matrix allows us to summarize
a potentially complex array of survival, growth and reproductive
processes, and characterize that population succinctly by deter-mining the per capita rate of increase, R, implied by the matrix.
But crucially, this ‘asymptotic’ Rcan be determined directly,
without the need for a simulation, by application of the methodsof matrix algebra, though these are quite beyond our scope here  =×
×××++++××××++++ ((
(  )
)
)
)  ((((  )
)
)
)  ((((
,
,
,
,,,,,,,,,
n
n
n
np
gnnnnm
p
gnnnn
t
t
t
ttttttttt1111
11
111
12121
21
212
2
23131313
0
00 1 13
3
341
4141414
400
0  )
)
)
)  (
((
(  )
)
)
),
,,,×
×××++++××××⎡
⎣⎢
⎢⎢
⎢⎤
⎦⎥
⎥⎥
⎥m
p
gn
nnnm
p
t
ttt  pmmm
gp
gp
gpn
n
n
nn
n
nnt
t
t
tt
t
tt1234
12
23
3411
21
31
4112
22
32
4200
00
00⎡
⎣⎢
⎢⎢
⎢⎤
⎦⎥
⎥⎥
⎥×⎡
⎣⎢
⎢⎢
⎢⎤
⎦⎥
⎥⎥
⎥=⎡
⎣⎢
⎢⎢
⎢⎤
⎦⎥
⎥⎥
⎥     
,
,
,
,,
,
,,
•• ••elements of 
the matrix
n1
n2
n3
n44.5
0Log numbers
1
Time steps4.0
3.53.0
2.5
2.01.51.00.5
23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 00.2 1 10 1
0.3 0.2 0 0
0 0.3 0.1 0
0 0 0.3 0.1Figure 4.15 A population growing
according to the life cycle graph shown 
in Figure 4.14a, with parameter values asshown in the insert here. The startingconditions were 100 individuals in class 1
(n
1=100), 50 in class 2, 25 in class 4 and 10
in class 4. On a logarithmic (vertical) scale,
exponential growth appears as a straightline. Thus, after about 10 time steps, theparallel lines show that all classes were
growing at the same rate ( R=1.25) and
that a stable class structure had beenachieved.determining Rfrom 
a matrixEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 109110 CHAPTER 4
(but see Caswell, 2001). Moreover, such algebraic analysis can also
indicate whether a simple, stable class structure will indeed beachieved, and what that structure will be. It can also determinethe importance of each of the different components of the matrixin generating the overall outcome, R– a topic to which we return
in Section 14.3.2.
4.8 Life history evolution
An organism’s life history is its lifetime pattern of growth, dif-ferentiation, storage and reproduction; and we have seen some-thing in the preceding sections about the variety of patterns lifehistories may take and what the consequences may be in termsof population rates of increase. But can we understand how dif-
ferent species’ life histories have evolved? In fact, there are at leastthree different types of question that are commonly asked aboutthe evolution of life histories.
The ﬁrst is concerned with individual
life history traits. Why is it that swifts,for example, usually produce clutchesof three eggs, when other birds produce
larger clutches, and the swifts themselves are physiologicallycapable of doing so? Can we establish that thisclutch size is ultim-
ately the most productive, i.e. the ﬁttest in evolutionary terms,
and what is it about this particular clutch size that makes it so?
The second question is concerned with links between life his-
tory traits. Why is it, for example, that the ratio between age atmaturity and average lifespan is often roughly constant within agroup of organisms but markedly different between groups (e.g.mammals 1.3, ﬁsh 0.45)? What is the basis for the link betweenthese two traits within a group of related organisms? What is thebasis for differences amongst groups?
The third question, then, is concerned with links between life
histories and habitats. How does it come about that orchids, forexample, produce vast numbers of tiny seeds when tropical Mora
trees produce just a few enormous ones? Can the difference be
related directly to differences in the habitats that they occupy, orto any other differences between them?
In short, the study of the evolution of life histories is a search
for patterns – and for explanations for those patterns. We mustremember, however, that every life history, and every habitat, isunique. In order to ﬁnd ways in which life histories might begrouped, classiﬁed and compared, we must ﬁnd ways of describ-ing them that apply to all life histories and all habitats. Only thencan we search for associations between one life history trait andanother or between life history traits and features of the habitatsin which the life histories are found. It is also important to realize that the possession of one life history trait may limit thepossible range of some other trait, and the morphology andphysiology of an organism may limit the possible range of all its life history traits. The most that natural selection can do is tofavor, in a particular environment with its many, often conﬂicting
demands, the life history that has been most (not ‘perfectly’) successful, overall, at leaving descendants in the past.
None the less, most of the successes
in the search for an understanding of lifehistory evolution have been based onthe idea of optimization: establishing that
observed combinations of life historytraits are those with the highest ﬁtness(Stearns, 2000). It is also important to note, however, that thereare alternative approaches – one long-established, two others morerecent – that certainly have much to recommend them in theory,even if their explanatory powers to date have been limited compared to the optimization approach (Stearns, 2000). The ﬁrstis ‘bet-hedging’: the idea that when ﬁtness ﬂuctuates, it may be
most important to minimize the setbacks from periods of low ﬁtnessrather than evolving to a single optimum (Gillespie, 1977). Thesecond acknowledges that the ﬁtness of any life history cannotbe seen in isolation: it depends on the life histories of other individuals in the population, such that ﬁtness of a life history is‘frequency dependent’ – dependent on the proportions of that andother life histories in the population (e.g. Sinervo et al. , 2000). The
third, then, includes an explicit consideration of the dynamics 
of the population concerned, rather than making the usual simplifying assumption of population stability (e.g. Ranta et al. ,
2000). Here, though, we focus on the optimization approach.
4.8.1 Components of life histories
What are the most important components of any organism’s 
life history? Individual size is perhaps the most apparent aspect.As we have seen, it is particularly variable in organisms with amodular construction. Large size may increase an organism’s com-petitive ability, or increase its success as a predator or decrease
its vulnerability to predation, and hence increase the survival oflarger organisms. Stored energy and/or resources will also be ofbeneﬁt to those organisms that pass through periods of reducedor irregular nutrient supply (probably true of most species at sometime). Finally, of course, larger individuals within a species usu-ally produce more offspring. Size, however, can increase somerisks: a larger tree is more likely to be felled in a gale, many preda-tors exhibit a preference for larger prey, and larger individuals typically require more resources and may therefore be more
prone to a shortage of them. Hence it is easy to see why detailedstudies are increasingly conﬁrming an intermediate, not a max-imum, size to be optimal (Figure 4.16).
Development is the progressive differentiation of parts,
enabling an organism to do different things at different stages in its life history. Hence rapid development can increase ﬁtnessbecause it leads to the rapid initiation of reproduction. As we have seen, reproduction itself may occur in one terminal burst
•• ••three types of
questionoptimization andother approaches tounderstanding lifehistory evolutionEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 110LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 111
(semelparity) or as a series of repeated events (iteroparity).
Amongst iteroparous organisms, variation is possible in thenumber of separate clutches of offspring, and all organisms canvary in the number of offspring in a clutch.
The individual offspring can themselves vary in size. Large
newly emerged or newly germinated offspring are often better
competitors, better at obtaining nutrients and better at survivingin extreme environments. Hence, they often have a better chanceof surviving to reproduce themselves.
Combining all of this detail, life histories are often described
in terms of a composite measure of reproductive activity knownas ‘reproductive allocation’ (also often called ‘reproductive effort’).This is best deﬁned as the proportion of the available resourceinput that is allocated to reproduction over a deﬁned period of
time; but it is far easier to deﬁne than it is to measure. Figure 4.17shows an example involving the allocation of nitrogen, a crucialresource in this case. In practice, even the better studies usuallymonitor only the allocation of energy or just dry weight to vari-ous structures at a number of stages in the organism’s life cycle.
4.8.2 Reproductive value
Natural selection favors those individuals that make the greatest
proportionate contribution to the future of the population to whichthey belong. All life history components affect this contribution,ultimately through their effects on fecundity and survival. It isnecessary, though, to combine these effects into a single currency
so that different life histories may be judged and compared. A num-ber of measures of ﬁtness have been used. All the better ones havemade use of both fecundity and survival schedules, but theyhave done so in different ways, and there has often been markeddisagreement as to which of them is the most appropriate. Theintrinsic rate of natural increase, r, and the basic reproductive rate,
R
0(see above) have had their advocates, as has ‘reproductive value’
(Fisher, 1930; Williams, 1966), especially reproductive value at birth
(Kozlowski, 1993; de Jong, 1994). For an exploration of the basicpatterns in life histories, however, the similarities between thesevarious measures are far more important than the minor differ-
ences between them. We concentrate here on reproductive value.
Reproductive value is described in
some detail in Box 4.1. For most pur-poses though, these details can beignored as long as it is rememberedthat: (i) reproductive value at a given age or stage is the sum ofthe current reproductive output and the residual (i.e. future)
reproductive value (RRV); (ii) RRV combines expected future 
•• ••reproductive value
described in words51015203.5
3.25
3.0
2.75
Adult male weight (mg)
Number of mates in
a lifetime (graph)Frequency in the
population (%) (histogram)25 30 35 40 45
Figure 4.16 For adult male damselﬂies, Coenagrion puella , the
predicted optimum size (weight) is intermediate (upper graph),
and corresponds closely to the modal size class in the population(histogram below). The upper graph takes this form becausemating rate decreases with weight, whereas lifespan increases 
with weight (mating rate =1.15−0.018 weight, P< 0.05; lifespan
=0.21−0.44 weight, P< 0.05; n=186). (After Thompson, 1989.)
RPCDCLISF
Months
Parent corm (PC)
Roots (R)
Leaves (L)Daughter corm (DC)
Inflorescence stalk (IS)
Flowers (F)FruitJan06080100Nitrogen allocation (%)40
20
Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov DecFigure 4.17 Percentage allocation of 
the crucial resource nitrogen to different
structures throughout the annual cycle of the perennial plant Sparaxis grandiﬂora
in South Africa, where it sets fruit in the
southern hemisphere spring (September–December). The plant grows each yearfrom a corm, which it replaces over the growing season, but note thedevelopment of reproductive parts at the expense of roots and leaves towardthe end of the growing season. The plantparts themselves are illustrated to the rightfor a plant in early spring. (After Ruiters &
McKenzie, 1994.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 111112 CHAPTER 4
survival and expected future fecundity; (iii) this is done in a way
that takes account of the contribution of an individual to futuregenerations, relative to the contributions of others; and (iv) thelife history favored by natural selection from amongst thoseavailable in the population will be the one for which the sum of
contemporary output and RRV is highest.
The way in which reproductive value changes with age in two
contrasting populations is illustrated in Figure 4.18. It is low foryoung individuals when each of them has only a low probabilityof surviving to reproductive maturity; but for those that do sur-vive, it then increases steadily as the age of ﬁrst reproduction isapproached, as it becomes more and more certain that survivingindividuals will reach reproductive maturity. Reproductive valueis then low again for old individuals, since their reproductive 
output is likely to have declined, and their expectation of futurereproduction is even lower. The detailed rise and fall, of course,
varies with the detailed age- or stage-speciﬁc birth or mortalityschedules of the species concerned.
4.8.3 Trade-offs
Any organism’s life history must, of necessity, be a compromiseallocation of the resources that are available to it. Resources devotedto one trait are unavailable to others. A ‘trade-off’ is a negativerelationship between two life history characteristics in whichincreases in one are associated with decreases in the other as a
result of such compromises. For instance, Douglas ﬁr trees(Pseudotsuga menziesii ) beneﬁt both from reproducing and from
growing (since, amongst other things, this enhances future
•• ••Box 4.1 Reproductive value
The reproductive value of an individual of age x(RVx) is the
currency by which the worth of a life history in the hands of
natural selection may be judged. It is deﬁned in terms of thelife-table statistics discussed earlier. Speciﬁcally:
where m
xis the birth rate of the individual in age-class x; lxis
the probability that the individual will survive to age x; Ris the
net reproductive rate of the whole population per unit time (the
time unit here being the age interval); and Smeans ‘the sum of’.
To understand this equation, it is easiest to split RVxinto
its two components:
Here, mx, the individual’s birth rate at its current age, can 
be thought of as its contemporary reproductive output . What
remains is then the residual reproductive value (Williams,
1966): the sum of the ‘expectations of reproduction’ at all 
subsequent ages, modiﬁed in each case by Rx−yfor reasons
described below. The ‘expectation of reproduction’ for ageclass yis (l
y/lx· (my)), i.e. it is the birth rate of the individual
should it reach that age ( my), discounted by the probability of
it doing so given that it has already reached stage x (ly/lx).
Reproductive value takes on its simplest form where the 
overall population size remains approximately constant. In  RVxxy
xyxy
yxyy
ml
lmR     .max
=+ ⋅ ⋅⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟−
=+=
∑
1  RVxy
xyxy
yxyyl
lmR   max
=⋅ ⋅⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟−
==
∑such cases, R=1 and can be ignored. The reproductive value
of an individual is then simply its total lifetime expectation 
of reproductive output (from its current age class and from allsubsequent age classes).
However, when the population consistently increases or
decreases, this must be taken into account. If the population
increases, then R>1 and R
x−y<1 (because x<y). Hence, the
terms in the equation are reduced by Rx−ythe larger the 
value of y(the further into the future we go), signifying that
future (i.e. ‘residual’) reproduction adds relatively little to RVx,
because the proportionate contribution to a growing popula-
tion made by a given reproductive output in the future is relatively small – whereas the offspring from present or earlyreproduction themselves have an early opportunity to contribute
to the growing population. Conversely, if the populationdecreases, then R<1 and R
x−y>1, and the terms in the equa-
tion are successively increased, reﬂecting the greater propor-
tionate contribution of future reproduction.
In any life history, the reproductive values at different ages
are intimately connected, in the sense that when natural
selection acts to maximize reproductive value at one age, it constrains the values of the life table parameters – and thusreproductive value itself – for subsequent ages. Hence, strictlyspeaking, natural selection acts ultimately to maximize repro-ductive value at birth , RV
0(Kozlowski, 1993). (Note that there
is no contradiction between this and the fact that reproduc-
tive value is typically low at birth (Figure 4.18). Natural selec-tion can discriminate only between those options available atthat stage.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 112LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 113
reproduction), but the more cones they produce the less they grow
(Figure 4.19a). Male fruit-ﬂies beneﬁt both from a long period ofreproductive activity and from a high frequency of matings, butthe higher their level of reproductive activity earlier in life thesooner they die (Figure 4.19b).
Yet it would be quite wrong to
think that such negative correlations
abound in nature, only waiting to beobserved. On the contrary, we cannot
generally expect to see trade-offs by simply observing correlationsin natural populations (Lessells, 1991). In the ﬁrst place, if thereis just one clearly optimal way of combining, say, growth and repro-ductive output, then all individuals may approximate closely tothis optimum and a population would then lack the variation in
these traits necessary for a trade-off to be seen. Moreover, if thereis variation between individuals in the amount of resource they
have at their disposal, then there is likely to be a positive, not anegative, correlation between two apparently alternative processes– some individuals will be good at everything, others consistentlyawful. For instance, in Figure 4.20, the aspic vipers ( Vipera aspis )
in the best condition produced larger litters but also recoveredfrom breeding more rapidly, ready to breed again.
Two approaches have sought to
overcome these problems and henceallow the investigation of the nature oftrade-off curves. The ﬁrst is based on comparisons of individualsdiffering genetically , where different genotypes are thought likely
to give rise to different allocations of resources to alternative traits.
Genotypes can be compared in two ways: (i) by a breeding experi-ment, in which genetically contrasting groups are bred and thencompared; or (ii) by a selection experiment, in which a popula-tion is subjected to a selection pressure to alter one trait, and asso-ciated changes in other traits are then monitored. For example,in one selection experiment, populations of the Indian mealmoth, Plodia interpunctella , that evolved increased resistance to a
virus having been infected with it for a number of generations,exhibited an associated decrease (negative correlation) in their rateof development (Boots & Begon, 1993). Overall, however, thesearch for genetic correlations has generated more zero and positive than negative correlations (Lessells, 1991), and it has there-
fore had only limited success to date in measuring trade-offs, despitereceiving strong support from its adherents by virtue of its directapproach to the underlying basis for selective differentials betweenlife histories (Reznick, 1985; Rose et al. , 1987).
The alternative approach is to use
experimental manipulation to reveal a trade-off directly from a negativephenotypic correlation. The Drosophila
study in Figure 4.19b is an example of this. The great advantage
of experimental manipulation over simple observation is that indi-viduals are assigned experimental treatments at random rather than differing from one another, for instance, in the quantity ofresource that they have at their disposal. This contrast is illustratedin Figure 4.21, which shows two sets of data for the bruchid beetle Callosobruchus maculatus in which fecundity and longevity
were correlated. Simple observation of an unmanipulated popu-lation gave rise to a positive correlation: the ‘better’ individuals
both lived longer and laid more eggs. When fecundity varied, how-ever, not as a result of differing resource availability, but becauseaccess to mates and/or egg-laying sites was manipulated, a trade-off (negative correlation) was revealed.
However, this contrast between experimental manipulation
(‘good’) and simple observation (‘bad’) is not always straightfor-ward (Bell & Koufopanou, 1986; Lessells, 1991). Some manipulationssuffer from much the same problems as simple observations. Forinstance, if clutch size is manipulated by giving supplementary
food, then improvements in other traits are to be expected as well.
•• ••(a)
0Reproductive value
Age (days)5
501015
100 150 200 250 300 350
(b)
0Reproductive value
Age (years)2
2 0 468 1 046810
Figure 4.18 Reproductive value generally rises and then falls
with age, as explained in the text. (a) The annual plant Phlox
drummondii , described earlier in the chapter. (After Leverich &
Levin, 1979.) (b) The sparrowhawk, Accipiter nisus , in southern
Scotland. Solid symbols ( ±1 SE) refer to breeders only; open
symbols include nonbreeders. (After Newton & Rothery, 1997.)
Note that in both cases the vertical scale is arbitrary, in the sensethat the rate of increase ( R) for the whole population was not
known, and a value therefore had to be assumed.
trade-offs are not
easy to observegenetic comparisons
experimentalmanipulationsEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 113114 CHAPTER 4
It is important that the manipulation should alter the target trait
and nothing else. On the other hand, simple observation may beacceptable if based on the results of a ‘natural’ experiment. Forexample, it is likely that as a result of ‘mast seeding’ (see Section 9.4)the population of ﬁr trees in Figure 4.19a produced large and small crops of cones in response to factors other than resourceavailability, and that the negative correlation therefore genuinelyrepresented an underlying trade-off.
•• ••Relative width of annual rings
0
Mean number of cones per tree400120
800 1200 1600 2000115
110
105
100
95
90858075
(b)
Longevity (days)
Male size (mm)0100
50
0.6 0.8 1.088818888888111
1
8
8888 8 188888
811 1 1111 1
1
1188
8
1111
11111
8(a)
Figure 4.19 Life history trade-offs. 
(a) The negative correlation between 
cone crop size and annual growthincrement for a population of Douglas ﬁrtrees, Pseudotsuga menziesii . (After Eis et al. ,
1965.) (b) The longevity of male fruit-ﬂies
(Drosophila melanogaster ) generally increases
with size (thorax length). However,longevity was reduced in males providedwith one virgin and seven mated femalesper day (1) compared with those providedwith eight mated famales (
/H17033), because of
the increase in courtship activity, and
reduced still further in males provided with eight virgins per day (8). (AfterPartridge & Farquhar, 1981.)Mass recovery (g yr –1)
–30–20100
020406080
–20 –10 0 10 20 30Relative litter mass (residuals)Figure 4.20 Female aspic vipers ( Vipera
aspis ) that produced larger litters (‘relative’
litter mass because total female mass was
taken into account) also recovered morerapidly from reproduction (not ‘relative’
because mass recovery was not affected by size) ( r=0.43; P=0.01). (After Bonnet 
et al. , 2002.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 114LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 115
In the ﬁnal analysis, though, it is generally agreed that trade-
offs are widespread and important. The problems arise in reveal-
ing and hence quantifying them.
4.8.4 The cost of reproduction
Most attention has been directed at trade-offs that reveal anapparent ‘cost of reproduction’ (CR). Here, ‘cost’ is used in a particular way to indicate that an individual, by increasing its current allocation to reproduction, is likely to decrease its survivaland/or its rate of growth, and therefore decrease its potential 
for reproduction in future. This is shown by the ﬁr trees and fruit-ﬂies in Figure 4.19 and by the beetles in Figure 4.21. Thecosts of reproduction can be shown even more easily withplants. All good gardeners know, for example, that to prolong thelife of perennial ﬂowering herbs, the ripening seed heads shouldbe removed, since these compete for resources that may beavailable for improved survivorship and even better ﬂowering nextyear. When ragwort plants ( Senecio jacobaea ) of a given size are
compared at the end of a season, it is only those that have made
the smallest reproductive allocation that survive (Figure 4.22).
Thus, individuals that delay reproduction, or restrain their 
reproduction to a level less than the maximum, may grow faster,grow larger or have an increased quantity of resources availablefor maintenance, storage and, ultimately, future reproduction. Any ‘cost’ incurred by contemporary reproduction, therefore, islikely to contribute to a decrease in residual reproductive value(RRV). Yet, as we have noted, natural selection favors the life 
history with the highest available total reproductive value: the 
sum of two quantities, one of which (contemporary reproductiveoutput) tends to go up as the other (RRV) goes down. Trade-offs involving the cost of reproduction are at the heart of the evolution of any life history.
•• ••
Longevity (days)
05
150 50 1001015
010
75 25 502030
Fecundity Fecundity(a) (b)
Figure 4.21 (a) The (positive) phenotypic
correlation in an unmanipulated population
between adult longevity and fecundity infemale bruchid beetles, Callosobruchus
maculatus . (b) The (negative) trade-off
between the same traits when access 
to mates and/or egg-laying sites wasmanipulated. Points are means of four treatments with standard errors. (After Lessells, 1991; from K. Wilson,unpublished data.)
150
100
50Number of capitula
Rootstock volume (cm3)2.4 2.0 1.6 1.2 0.8 0.4 0Figure 4.22 The cost of reproduction in
ragwort ( Senecio jacobaea ). The line divides
plants that survive ( /H17004), from those that
have died by the end of the season ( 9).
There are no surviving plants above and 
to the left of the line. For a given size(rootstock volume), only those that have
made the smallest reproductive allocation(number of capitula) survive, althoughlarger plants are able to make a largerallocation and still survive. (After Gilman& Crawley, 1990.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 115116 CHAPTER 4
4.8.5 The number and ﬁtness of offspring
A second key trade-off is that between the number of offspring
and their individual ﬁtness. At its simplest, this is a trade-off betweenthe size and number of offspring, within a given total reproduct-ive investment. That is, a reproductive allocation can be dividedinto fewer, larger offspring or more, smaller offspring. However,
the size of an egg or seed is only an index of its likely ﬁtness. It may be more appropriate to look for a trade-off between thenumber of offspring and, say, their individual survivorship or developmental rate.
Of the few genetic correlations between egg size and number
that have so far been examined (dominated by domestic poultry),the majority have been negative, as expected (Lessells, 1991). Negat-ive correlations have also been observed in simple cross-speciesor cross-population comparisons (e.g. Figure 4.23a, b), although
it is unlikely in such cases that the individuals from different speciesor populations are making precisely the same total reproductiveallocation. Moreover, this type of trade-off is especially difﬁcultto observe through experimental manipulation. To see why, notethat we need to ask the following kind of question. Given that a plant, say, produces 100 seeds each weighing 10 mg and eachwith a 5% chance of developing to reproductive maturity, what
would be the seed size, and what would be the chance of devel-oping to maturity, if an identical plant receiving identical resourcesproduced only 80 seeds? Clearly, it would be invalid to manipu-late seed number by altering the provision of resources; andeven if 20 seeds were removed at or close to their point of pro-duction, the plant would be limited in its ability to alter the size
of the remaining seeds, and their subsequent survivorship would
not really address the question originally posed.
Sinervo (1990), though, did manipulate the size of the eggs of
an iguanid lizard ( Sceloporus occidentalis ) by removing yolk from
them after they have been produced, giving rise to healthy butsmaller offspring than unmanipulated eggs. These smaller hatch-lings had a slower sprint speed (Figure 4.23c) – probably an indica-tion of a reduced ability to avoid predators, and hence of a lower
ﬁtness. Within natural populations, this species produces smallerclutches of larger eggs in California than in Washington (typicallyseven to eight eggs with an average weight of 0.65 g, as againstapproximately 12 eggs weighing 0.4 g; Figure 4.23c). Thus, in thelight of the experimental manipulations, the comparison betweenthe two populations does indeed appear to reﬂect a trade-offbetween the number of offspring and their individual ﬁtness.
•• ••102103104105
102–1.0
–7.0–5.0–3.0
5.0 4.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 103104(a)
(b) (c)Number of propagules per basal stem
Ln (relative egg volume)
Mean weight ( µg) of single propagules Ln (clutch size)2.5
2.0
CA
WA1.5
1.0
0.5
1.6 1.4 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4Sprint speed (m s–1)
Hatchling mass (g)Old field
PrairieOak woodsPrairie disturbance
2
3
4
82
5
3
5
61
4
9
71
Figure 4.23 Evidence for a trade-off between the number of offspring produced in a clutch by a parent and the individual ﬁtness of those
offspring. (a) A negative correlation between the number of propagules per stem produced by goldenrod plants ( Solidago ) and the weight
of single propagules. The species are: 1, S. nemoralis ; 2, S. graminifolia ; 3, S. canadensis ; 4, S. speciosa ; 5, S. missouriensis ; 6, S. gigantea ; 
7, S. rigida ; 8, S. caesia ; and 9, S. rugosa , taken from a variety of habitats as shown. (After Werner & Platt, 1976.) (b) A negative correlation
between clutch size and egg volume amongst Hawaiian species of Drosophila , developing either on a relatively poor and restricted
resource, ﬂower pollen ( 8), or on bacteria within decaying leaves ( 4) or on especially unpredictable but productive resources – yeasts
within rotten fruits, barks and stems ( /H17039). (After Montague et al. , 1981; Stearns, 1992.) (c) The mass and sprint speed of California hatchlings
of the lizard, Sceloporus occidentalis , are lower from eggs with some yolk removed ( 7) than from unmanipulated control eggs ( /H17033). Also
shown are the means for the control California hatchlings (CA) (fewer, larger eggs) and those for two samples from Washington ( WA)
(more, smaller eggs). (After Sinervo, 1990.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 116LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 117
4.9 Options sets, ﬁtness contours and 
a classiﬁcation of habitats
We turn next to another of our original life history questions –
are there patterns linking particular types of life history to par-ticular types of habitat? To address this question, we introducetwo further concepts. We do so in the context of the cost of reproduction, since the trade-offs associated with it are the most 
fundamental – but the same principles apply to any trade-off.
4.9.1 Options sets and ﬁtness contours
An options set describes the whole range of combinations of two
life history traits that an organism is capable of exhibiting. Hence,it reﬂects the organism’s underlying physiology. Here, for purposesof illustration, we use present reproduction, m
x, and growth (as
a potentially important indicator of RRV) (Figure 4.24). The
options set therefore describes, for any given level of present repro-duction, the range of growth increments that the organism canachieve, and for any given growth increment, the range of 
levels of present reproduction that the organism can achieve. Theouter boundary of the options set represents the trade-off curve.For any point on that boundary, the organism can only increasem
xby making a compensatory reduction in growth and vice versa.
An options set may be convex-outwards (Figure 4.24a),
implying in the present case that a level of present reproduc-
tion only slightly less than the maximum none the less allows a considerable amount of growth. Alternatively, the set may be
concave-outwards (Figure 4.24b), implying that substantial growth
•• ••(a) (b) (c)
Present growth
Present reproduction Present reproduction
Present growth Present growthPresent reproductionLow fitness Medium fitness
High fitnessPresent growth
(d)
Present growth
Present reproduction Present reproduction
Figure 4.24 (a, b) Options sets – the combinations available to an organism of, in this case, present reproduction and present growth. 
As explained in the text, the outer boundary of the options set is a trade-off curve: (a) is convex-outwards, (b) concave-outwa rds. 
(c) Fitness contours linking combinations of present reproduction and present growth that have equal ﬁtness in a given habitat.  
Hence, contours further from the origin have greater ﬁtness. (d) The point in an options set with the greatest ﬁtness is the on e that
reaches the highest ﬁtness contour. This point, and the (optimal) value for present reproduction giving rise to it, are marked with an
asterisk. (After Sibly & Calow, 1983.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 117118 CHAPTER 4
can only be achieved with a level of present reproduction 
considerably less than the maximum.
A ﬁtness contour , then, is a line joining, in this case, combina-
tions of mxand growth for which ﬁtness (reproductive value) is
constant (Figure 4.24c). Contours further away from the origintherefore represent combinations with greater ﬁtness. As describedbelow, the shapes of ﬁtness contours reﬂect not the organism’sintrinsic properties but the habitat in which it lives.
The combination of traits, amongst those available, that has
the highest ﬁtness determines the direction of natural selection.
Natural selection therefore favors the point in the options set (on the trade-off curve) that reaches the highest ﬁtness contour(indicated by the asterisks in Figure 4.24d, e). Since differentoptions sets imply different types of organism, and differentshapes of ﬁtness contour imply different types of habitat, they can be used together as a guide to where and when different typesof life history might be found.
4.9.2 Habitats: a classiﬁcation
Each organism’s habitat is unique, but if a pattern linking 
habitats and life histories is to be established, habitats must beclassiﬁed in terms that apply to them all. Moreover, they mustbe described and classiﬁed from the point of view of the organ-ism concerned, rather than whether wefeel the habitat is patchy
or homogeneous, harsh or benign. Thus, when we say that the
shapes of ﬁtness contours reﬂect an organism’s habitat, we meanthat they reﬂect the effect of the habitat on that particular organ-ism or the response of that organism to the habitat.A number of classiﬁcations of habitat types have been proposed
(e.g. Schaffer, 1974; Grime et al. , 1988; Silvertown et al. , 1993),
but a review of these is beyond our scope here. Instead, we 
classify habitats by focusing on ﬁtness contours, and hence on the ways in which present reproduction and growth combine todetermine ﬁtness in different types of habitat (following Levins,1968; Sibly & Calow, 1983).
For established individuals (i.e. not newly emerged or newly
born offspring) two contrasting habitat types can be recognized.
1High CR (cost of reproduction)
habitats, in which any reducedgrowth that results from presentreproduction has a signiﬁcant negat-ive effect on RRV, and hence onﬁtness. Thus, similar ﬁtness can beachieved by combining high reproduction with low growthor low reproduction with high growth. Fitness contours
therefore run diagonally with a negative slope (Figure 4.25a).
2Low CR habitats, in which RRV is little affected by the levelof present growth. Fitness is thus essentially determined by the level of present reproduction alone and will be muchthe same whatever the level of present growth. The ﬁtnesscontours therefore run approximately vertically (parallel to the‘growth’ axis; Figure 4.25a).
This classiﬁcation is comparative. In practice, a habitat can only
be described as ‘high CR’ relative to some other habitat that is,
comparatively, low CR. The purpose of the classiﬁcation is to contrast habitats with one another.
•• ••(b)
C  Offspring size-sensitive
D  Offspring size-insensitive
Offspring numberOffspring size(a)
B  Low CR
Present reproductionPresent growthA  High CR(c)
A B
C
D(i)
(iii)(ii)
(iv)
Figure 4.25 A demographic classiﬁcation of habitats. (a) Habitats of established individuals can be either: (A) relatively high CR (ﬁtness
contours indicate that residual reproductive value rises sharply with increased growth resulting from decreased present reprodu ction) or
(B) relatively low CR (ﬁtness contours largely reﬂect the level of present reproduction). (b) Habitats of recently produced off spring can be
either: (C) relatively offspring size-sensitive or (D) relatively offspring size-insensitive. Larger offspring size is assumed to imply a smaller
number of them (for a given reproductive allocation). Hence, for example, in (D), ﬁtness largely reﬂects the number of offsprin g – not
their individual size. (c) By combining these two contrasting pairs, the habitat of one organism over its whole life, compared with another
organism, can be of four basic types, arbitrarily referred to as (i)–(iv) in the ﬁgure.high and low 
CR habitats: acomparativeclassiﬁcationEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 118LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 119
Moreover a habitat can be of a par-
ticular type for a variety of reasons.
Habitats can be relatively high CR forat least two reasons.
1When there is intense competition amongst established 
individuals (see Chapter 5), with only the best competitors 
surviving and reproducing, present reproduction may becostly because it reduces growth and hence substantiallyreduces competitive ability in the future, and thus reduces RRV.Red deer stags, where only the best competitors can hold aharem of females, are a good example of this.
2Whenever diminutive adults are particularly susceptible to 
an important source of mortality from a predator or some abiotic factor, present reproduction may be costly because itmaintains adults in these vulnerable size classes. For instance,mussels on the seashore may, through reproductive restraint,outgrow predation by both crabs and eider ducks.
On the other hand, habitats can be relatively low CR for at
least three different reasons.1Much mortality may be indiscriminate and unavoidable, so that
any increase in size caused by reproductive restraint is likely tobe worthless in future. For instance, when temporary ponds dryout, most individuals die irrespective of their size or condition.
2The habitat may be so benign and competition-free for estab-
lished individuals that all of them have a high probability ofsurviving, and a large future reproductive output, irrespectiveof any present lack of reproductive restraint. This is true, atleast temporarily, for the ﬁrst colonists to arrive in a newlyarisen habitat.
3A habitat may be low CR simply because there are importantsources of mortality to which the largest individuals are espe-cially prone. Thus, restrained present reproduction, by lead-ing to greater size, may give rise to lowered survival in future.
For instance, in the Amazon, avian predators preferentially preyupon the largest individuals of certain ﬁsh species.
A related classiﬁcation of habitats
for newly born offspring can also be constructed. Again, there are two con-trasting types (Figure 4.25b), assuming
that, for a given reproductive allocation, larger offspring can beproduced only if there are fewer of them.
1‘Offspring size-sensitive’ habitats, in which the reproductive
value of individual offspring rises signiﬁcantly with size (asabove, either because of competition amongst offspring, orbecause of important sources of mortality to which small off-spring are especially vulnerable). An increase in size implies a
signiﬁcant rise up the ﬁtness contours.2‘Offspring size-insensitive’ habitats, in which the reproductive
value of individual offspring is little affected by their size (as above, because of indiscriminate mortality, or because of superabundant resources, or because there are sources of mortality to which larger individuals are more prone). 
An increase in size implies a negligible move up the ﬁtness contours.
Together, clearly, the two contrasting pairs can be combined
into four types of habitat (Figure 4.25c).
4.10 Reproductive allocation and its timing
4.10.1 Reproductive allocation
If we assume initially that all options sets are convex-outwards,
then we can see that relatively low CR habitats should favor ahigher reproductive allocation, whilst relatively high CR habitatsfavor a lower reproductive allocation (Figure 4.26a). This patterncan be seen in three populations of the dandelion Taraxacum
ofﬁcinale . The populations were composed of a number of distinct
clones that belonged to one or other of four biotypes (A–D). The
habitats of the populations varied from a footpath (the habitat inwhich adult mortality was most indiscriminate – ‘lowest CR’) toan old, stable pasture (the habitat with most adult competition –‘highest CR’); the third site was intermediate between the othertwo. In line with predictions, the biotype that predominated inthe footpath site (A) made the greatest reproductive allocation(whichever site it was obtained from), whilst the biotype that pre-
dominated in the old pasture (D) made the lowest reproductiveallocation (Figure 4.26b, c). Biotypes B and C were appropriatelyintermediate with respect both to their site occupancies andtheir reproductive allocations.
4.10.2 Age at maturity
Since relatively high CR habitats should favor low reproductive
allocations, maturity (the onset of sexual reproduction) should berelatively delayed in such habitats but should occur at a relativelylarge size (in deferring maturity at any given time, an organismis making a reproductive allocation of zero). These ideas are 
supported by a study of guppies, Poecilia reticulata , a small ﬁsh
species in Trinidad (Table 4.6). The same work also provides sup-port for the patterns of reproductive allocation discussed above,and for patterns of variation in offspring size, discussed inSection 4.11. The guppies live in small streams that can bedivided into two contrasting types. In one, their main predatoris a cichlid ﬁsh, Crenicichla alta , which eats mostly large, sexually
mature guppies. In the other, the main predator is a killiﬁsh, Rivulus
hartii , which prefers small, juvenile guppies. The Crenicichla sites
•• ••habitat types can
arise for a variety ofreasons
related classiﬁcationof habitats for newlyborn offspringEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 119•• ••120 CHAPTER 4
High CR
Present reproduction(a)
Present growth
Low CR*
*
(b)
Distribution of
biotypes in 3populations100
60
20
123A
123B
123C
123D
Site:
Disturbance: High Med Low
(c)
Flower-heads per
plant (i.e RA)in standard
conditions
Site of origin:1
123A
234
123B
123C
123DFigure 4.26 (a) Options sets and ﬁtness
contours (see Figure 4.25) suggest that
relatively high CR habitats should favorrelatively small reproductive allocations.(b) The distribution of four biotypes 
(A–D) of the dandelion Taraxacum ofﬁcinale ,
amongst three populations subject to low,medium and high levels of disturbance (i.e.habitats ranging from relatively high CR to relatively low CR). (c) The reproductiveallocations (RAs) of the different biotypesfrom the different sites of origin, showingthat biotype A, which predominates in therelatively low CR habitat, has a relatively
large RA, and so on. ((b, c) after Solbrig &Simpson, 1974.)
Table 4.6 A comparison of guppies ( Poecilia reticulata ) from relatively low CR, offspring size-insensitive sites ( Crenicichla – predation
concentrated on larger, adult ﬁsh) and relatively high CR, offspring size-sensitive sites ( Rivulus – predation concentrated on small, juvenile
ﬁsh). In the former, the guppies (male and female) mature earlier and smaller, make a larger reproductive allocation (shorter i nterlitter
interval, higher percentage effort) and produce smaller offspring (and more of them). This is true both for natural populations  from
contrasting sites (left) and comparing a population introduced to a Rivulus site with its unmanipulated control (right). (After Reznick 
et al., 1982, 1990.)
Reznick (1982) Reznick et al .(1990)
Control Introduction 
Crenicichla Rivulus (Crenicichla) (Rivulus)
Male age at maturity (days) 51.8 P<0.01 58.8 48.5 P<0.01 58.2
Male size at maturity (mg wet) 87.7 P<0.01 99.7 67.5 P<0.01 76.1
Female age at ﬁrst birth (days) 71.5 P<0.01 81.9 85.7 P<0.05 92.3
Female size at ﬁrst birth (mg wet) 218.0 P<0.01 270.0 161.5 P<0.01 185.6
Size of litter 1 5.2 P<0.01 3.2 4.5 P<0.05 3.3
Size of litter 2 10.9 NS 10.2 8.1 NS 7.5
Size of litter 3 16.1 NS 16.0 11.4 NS 11.5Offspring weight (mg dry) litter 1 0.84 P<0.01 0.99 0.87 P<0.10 0.95
Offspring weight litter 2 0.95 P<0.05 1.05 0.90 P<0.05 1.02
Offspring weight litter 3 1.03 P<0.01 1.17 1.10 NS 1.17
Interlitter interval (days) 22.8 NS 25.0 24.5 NS 25.2Reproductive effort (%) 25.1 P<0.05 19.2 22.0 NS 18.5
NS, not signiﬁcant.EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 120••LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 121
are therefore relatively low CR, and, as predicted, the guppies there
mature earlier and at a smaller size. They also make a larger repro-ductive allocation (left-hand columns in Table 4.6) (Reznick,1982). Moreover, when 200 guppies were introduced from aCrenicichla to a Rivulus site, and lived there for 11 years (30–
60 generations), not only did the phenotypes in the ﬁeld come to
resemble those of other high CR ( Rivulus ) sites, but it was also
clear that these differences had evolved and were heritable, sincethey were also discernable under laboratory conditions (right-handcolumns in Table 4.5) (Reznick et al. , 1990).
Understanding age at maturity,
however, requires us to move beyondour simple classiﬁcation of habitats.For example, the favored age and size
at maturity can be thought of as being
governed by a trade-off between juvenile (pre-maturity) survivaland reproductive value at maturity (for a review, see Stearns, 1992).Deferring maturity to a larger size increases the reproductive valueat maturity, but it does so at the expense of decreased juvenilesurvival, since the juvenile phase is, by deﬁnition, extendedwhen maturity is deferred. With this trade-off in mind, we canask, for example, how age and size at maturity might differbetween a ‘productive’ environment, with abundant food, and an‘unproductive’ one in which individuals are poorly nourished. If increased food availability increases both the rate of growth (i.e.the size at a given age) and juvenile survival (i.e. the probabilityof reaching a given age), then the options set in the productiveenvironment will extend beyond that in the unproductive envir-onment, whatever the shape of the trade-off curve (Figure 4.27).Organisms in more productive environments should thenmature both earlier and at a larger size. This has been observedcommonly in Drosophila melanogaster : ﬂies growing at 27°C with
abundant food at moderate densities start to reproduce at 11 days,weighing 1.0 mg, whereas crowded, poorly nourished ﬂies startafter 15 days or more, weighing 0.5 mg (Stearns, 1992). Note herethat we are comparing the immediate responses of individuals totheir environments, rather than comparing two quite independentpopulations or species. We return to this point in Section 4.13.
4.10.3 Semelparity
Returning to a comparison of high and low CR habitats, it is clear
that semelparity is most likely to evolve in the latter (Figure 4.28a).This is borne out in a detailed way by work on two species ofLobelia living on Mount Kenya (Figure 4.28b). These are long-
lived herbaceous species: both take from 40 to 60 years even to
mature, following which the semelparous L. telekii dies, whereas
the iteroparous L. keniensis breeds only every 7–14 years. Young
(1990) and Young and Augspurger (1991) showed that in drierLobelia sites, probabilities of adult survival are smaller and periods
between reproductive events are longer, i.e. the drier sites are lower CR. Semelparity would only actually be favored there, how-ever, if semelparous plants also gained a sufﬁcient reproductiveadvantage by diverting more resources to reproduction and lessto future survival. In fact, there appears to be a close correspond-
ence between the geographic boundary between the semelparousand the iteroparous species and the boundary where the balanceof advantage swings from one to the other reproductive strategy(Figure 4.28b).
If we now relax our assumption that all options sets are con-
vex-outwards, it is apparent that semelparity is especially likelyto evolve in organisms with options sets that are concave-outwards,i.e. where even a low level of present reproduction leads to a con-siderable drop in, say, future survival, but increases from low tomoderate levels have little inﬂuence on survival (see Figure 4.24).This is the likely explanation for why many species of salmon display suicidal semelparity. Reproduction for them demands adangerous and effortful upstream migration from the sea to their
spawning grounds, but the risks and extra costs are associated withthe ‘act’ of reproduction and are largely independent of the mag-nitude of the reproductive allocation.
4.11 The size and number of offspring
According to the classiﬁcation of Section 4.9, the division of a given
reproductive allocation into a smaller number of larger offspringis expected in relatively offspring size-sensitive habitats. Support
••
Juvenile survivorship
Unproductive 
environment
Productive 
environment
Reproductive value at maturity
Figure 4.27 Age and size at maturity in productive and
unproductive environments. When reproductive value at maturity
is traded off against juvenile survivorship, the trade-off curve atthe edge of the options set in the productive environment liesbeyond that in the unproductive environment, and earlier maturity
at a larger size is predicted.
moving beyond the
classiﬁcation ofhabitatsEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 121122 CHAPTER 4
for this is provided by the observations and experiments on 
guppies described previously (see Table 4.6): offspring size was larger where predation was most concentrated on the smallerjuveniles; and also by examples in Figure 4.23 where offspring size was larger in habitats where competition was likely to be 
most intense – goldenrods in prairies (as opposed to more tem-porary old ﬁeld habitats) and Drosophila on pollen (as opposed to
rich but unpredictable sources of yeast).
4.11.1 The number of offspring: clutch size
The offspring number and ﬁtness trade-off, however, is perhaps
best not viewed in isolation. Rather, if we combine it with theCR trade-off, we can turn to another of our types of life historyquestion and ask: ‘How is it that particular clutch sizes, or par-ticular sizes of seed crop, have been favored?’
Lack (1947b) concentrated on the
trade-off between offspring number
and ﬁtness and proposed that natural
selection will favor not the largest clutch size but a compromiseclutch size, which, by balancing the number produced against theirsubsequent survival, leads to the maximum number surviving tomaturity. This has come to be known as the ‘Lack clutch size’(Figure 4.29a). A number of attempts, especially with birds andto a lesser extent with insects, have been made to test the validityof this proposal by adding eggs to or removing them from naturalclutches or broods, determining which clutch size is ultimatelythe most productive, and comparing this with the normal clutchsize. Many of these have suggested that Lack’s proposal is wrong:the clutch size most commonly observed ‘naturally’ is not the mostproductive. Experimental increases in clutch size, in particular, often
lead to apparent increases in productivity (Godfray, 1987; Lessells,1991; Stearns, 1992). Nevertheless, as is so often the case, Lack’sproposal, whilst wrong in detail, has been immensely importantin directing ecologists towards an understanding of clutch size.A number of reasons for the lack of ﬁt are now apparent and twoare particularly important.
First, many of the studies are likely
to have made an inadequate assess-
ment of the ﬁtness of individual off-spring. It is not enough to add two eggs to a bird’s normal clutchof four and note that six apparently healthy birds hatch, developand ﬂedge from the nest. How well do they survive the followingwinter? How many chicks do they have themselves? For example,in a long-term study of great tits ( Parus major ) near Oxford, UK,
•• ••2Interflowering interval (years)(b)
10
0.950 0.999 0.998 0.990 0.995 0.98018
Mean yearly adult survival1.5 50 41 0 2Wetter site
Drier site
Outlying
site
Fecundity ratioIteroparityDemarcation region between semelparity anditeroparity given uncertainty in the fecundity ratioPresent growth(a)
Maximum possible
allocation (RRV = 0)
Present reproduction (reproductive allocation)0 *Low CR
Semelparity
Figure 4.28 (a) Relatively low CR habitats (near-vertical ﬁtness contours) are more likely to give rise to semelparity (maximum
reproductive allocation: nothing kept in reserve). RRV, residual reproductive value. (b) For Lobelia spp. on Mount Kenya, habitats become
lower CR as interﬂowering interval increases (down the axis) and mean yearly adult survival decreases. Given that the semelparo us 
L. telekii sets approximately four times the weight of seed set by the iteroparous L. keniensis , habitats can be predicted to favor either
semelparity (bottom left) or iteroparity (upper right), with a region of uncertainty between the two. Three study populations o f 
L. keniensis have, as predicted, either habitat characteristics favoring iteroparity, or, in the case of an outlying site, characteristics i n 
the region of uncertainty. (After Young, 1990; Stearns, 1992.)
the Lack clutch sizebeyond the Lack
clutch sizeEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 122LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 123
whereas ‘addition’ nests were more immediately productive
(10.96) than control nests (8.68), which were more productive than removal nests (5.68), recruitment (i.e. survival of offspringto become breeding adults themselves) was highest from the unmanipulated clutches (Figure 4.29b).
Second, perhaps the most important omission from Lack’s 
proposal is any consideration of the cost of reproduction. Natural
selection will favor a lifetime pattern of reproduction that givesrise to the greatest ﬁtness overall. A large and apparently productiveclutch may extract too high a price in terms of RRV. The favoredclutch size will then be less than what appears to be the mostproductive in the short term (Figure 4.29c). Few studies have beensufﬁciently detailed to allow the cost of reproduction to be takeninto account in assessing an optimal clutch size. In one, bank vole
females ( Clethrionomys glareolus ) were treated with gonadotropin
hormones, inducing them to increase their reproductive alloca-tion to a larger litter (Oksanen et al. , 2002). Treated females were
considerably more productive at the time the litters were born,and a very small but none the less signiﬁcant increase was main-tained in the number of offspring surviving to the following winter. However, the treated females also paid a signiﬁcant costfor their increased reproductive efforts: higher mortality duringnursing, decreased body mass gain and a decreased probability of producing a subsequent litter. A second study, on kestrels, is
discussed below (see Section 4.13).
4.12 rand Kselection
Some of the predictions of the previous sections can be broughttogether in a scheme that has been particularly inﬂuential in the search for life history patterns. This is the concept of rand 
Kselection, originally propounded by MacArthur and Wilson 
(1967; MacArthur, 1962) and elaborated by Pianka (1970) (but, see
Boyce, 1984). The letter rrefers to the intrinsic rate of natural
increase (above) and indicates that r-selected individuals have 
been favored for their ability to reproduce rapidly (i.e. have a high r value). The letter Kwill not be introduced properly until
intraspeciﬁc competition is discussed fully in the next chapter, butfor now we need note only that it refers to the size (‘carrying capacity’) of a crowded population, limited by competition.Thus, K-selected individuals have been favored for their ability
to make a large proportional contribution to a population that
remains near that carrying capacity. The concept is therefore basedon there being two contrasting types of habitat: r-selecting and
K-selecting. It originally emerged (MacArthur & Wilson, 1967) from
•• ••
Fitness of individual offspring
Clutch size(a)
Total fitness
Clutch sizeCost or fitness
Optimum(c)
Clutch sizeFitness of
that clutchCost of
reproductionMaximum net benefit
0.0
–4
Experimental manipulation1.0
0.8
0.4Recruitment0.6
0.2
–3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3(b)Figure 4.29 (a) The ‘Lack clutch size’. 
If the ﬁtness of each individual offspring
decreases as total clutch size increases, then the total ﬁtness of a clutch (theproduct of number and individual ﬁtness)
must be maximized at some intermediate(‘Lack’) clutch size. (b) The mean observednumber of young recruited per nest ± SErelative to experimental manipulations(additions to, or removals from, clutches)in great tits. The curve is the polynomialRECRUITMENT ~ EXPTL MANIP +
(EXPTL MANIP)
2. (After Pettifor et al. ,
2001.) (c) However, if there is also a cost 
of reproduction, then the ‘optimum’ clutchsize is that where the net ﬁtness is greatest,i.e. here, where the distance between the
cost line and the ‘beneﬁt’ (total clutch)curve is greatest. (After Charnov & Krebs, 1974.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 123124 CHAPTER 4
the contrast between species that were good at rapidly coloniz-
ing relatively ‘empty’ islands ( rspecies), and species that were good
at maintaining themselves on islands once many colonizers hadreached there ( Kspecies). Subsequently, the concept was applied
much more generally. Like all generalizations, this dichotomy is
an oversimpliﬁcation – but one that has been immensely productive.
A K-selected population lives in a
habitat that imposes few random environmental ﬂuctuations on it. As a
consequence, a crowded population of fairly constant size isestablished. There is intense competition amongst the adults, and the results of this competition largely determine the adults’rates of survival and fecundity. The young also have to competefor survival in this crowded environment, and there are few
opportunities for the young to become established as breedingadults themselves. In short, the population lives in a habitat that, because of intense competition, is both high CR and offspringsize-sensitive.
The predicted characteristics of these K-selected individuals 
are therefore larger size, deferred reproduction, iteroparity (i.e.more extended reproduction), a lower reproductive allocation andlarger (and thus fewer) offspring. The individuals will generallyinvest in attributes that increase survival (as opposed to repro-duction); but in practice (because of the intense competition) manyof them will have very short lives.
By contrast, an r-selected popula-
tion lives in a habitat that is either
unpredictable in time or short lived.
Intermittently, the population experiences benign periods ofrapid population growth, free from competition (either when theenvironment ﬂuctuates into a favorable period, or when a site hasbeen newly colonized). But these benign periods are interspersedwith malevolent periods of unavoidable mortality (either in anunpredictable, unfavorable phase, or when an ephemeral site hasbeen fully exploited or disappears). The mortality rates of bothadults and juveniles are therefore highly variable and unpre-dictable, and they are frequently independent of population dens-ity and of the size and condition of the individuals concerned. Inshort, the habitat is both low CR and offspring size-insensitive.
The predicted characteristics of r-selected individuals are
therefore smaller size, earlier maturity, possibly semelparity, a largerreproductive allocation and more (and thus smaller) offspring. The individuals will invest little in survivorship, but their actualsurvival will vary considerably depending on the (unpredictable)environment in which they ﬁnd themselves.
The scheme is thus a special case of the general classiﬁcation
of habitats in Figure 4.25c. Note, therefore, ﬁrst, that adult andoffspring habitats need not be linked in the way the r/K scheme
envisages, and second, that the life history characteristics associ-ated with the r/K scheme can arise for all sorts of reasons beyond
its scope (e.g. predation of diminutive adults as opposed to intensecompetition amongst adults).4.12.1 Evidence for the r/Kconcept
The r/Kconcept can certainly be useful in describing some of the
general differences between taxa. For instance, amongst plants it
is possible to draw up a number of very broad and general rela-tionships (Figure 4.30). Trees, in relatively K-selecting woodland
habitats (relatively constant and predictable), exhibit long life,
delayed maturity, large seed size, low reproductive allocation, largeindividual size and a very high frequency of iteroparity. Whilstin more disturbed, open, r-selecting habitats, plants tend to 
conform to the general syndrome of r characteristics.
There are also many cases in which populations of a species,
or of closely related species, have been compared, and the cor-respondence with the r/K scheme has been good. For instance,
this is true of a study of Typha (cattail or reed mace) populations
(Table 4.7). Individuals of a southerly species, T. domingensis , and
a northerly species, T. angustifolia , were taken from sites in Texas
and North Dakota, respectively, and were grown side by side under
the same conditions. In addition, certain aspects of the habitats,with long and short growing seasons, in which these species are found were quantiﬁed. It is clear from Table 4.7 that the former were relatively K-selecting and the latter relatively r-
selecting. It is equally clear that the species inhabitating these sites conform to the r/K scheme. T. angustifolia (which naturally
has a short growing season) matures earlier (trait 1), is smaller(traits 2 and 3), makes a larger reproductive allocation (traits 3and 6) and produces more and smaller offspring (traits 4 and 5)than does T. domingensis (long growing season).
There are, then, examples that ﬁt 
ther/K scheme. Stearns (1977), however,
in an extensive review of the data
available at that time, found that of 35 thorough studies, 18 conformed tothe scheme whilst 17 did not. We might regard this as a damn-ing criticism of the r/K concept, since it undoubtedly shows that
the explanatory powers of the scheme are limited. On the otherhand, a 50% success rate is hardly surprising given the numberof additional factors already described (or to be described) thatfurther our understanding of life history patterns. It is thereforeequally possible to regard it as very satisfactory that a relativelysimple concept can help make sense of a large proportion of themultiplicity of life histories. Nobody, though, can regard the r/K
scheme as the whole story.
4.13 Phenotypic plasticity
A life history is not a ﬁxed property that an organism exhibits 
irrespective of the prevailing environmental conditions. Anobserved life history is the result of long-term evolutionaryforces, but also of the more immediate responses of an organ-ism to the environment in which it is and has been living. This
•• ••Kselection
rselection
the scheme explains
much – but leaves asmuch unexplainedEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 124LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 125
ability of a single genotype to express itself in different ways in
different environments is known as phenotypic plasticity.
One of the most important questions we need to ask about
phenotypic plasticity is the extent to which it represents aresponse by which an organism allocates resources differently 
in different environments such that it maximizes its ﬁtness in each. The alternative would be that the response represented adegree of inevitable or uncontrolled damage or stunting by theenvironment (Lessells, 1991). Note, especially, that if phenotypicplasticity is governed by natural selection, then it is just as validto seek patterns linking different environments and the differentresponses to them by a single individual, as it is to seek patternslinking the habitats and the life histories of genetically different
individuals.
In some cases at least, the appropriateness of a plastic
response seems clear. For example, kestrels (predatory birds) inthe Netherlands vary in the quality of their territory, the size of
their clutch and the date on which they lay it (Daan et al. , 1990).
The differences appear not to be genetically determined but tobe an example of phenotypic plasticity. Is each combination ofclutch size and laying date optimal in its own territory?
The optimal combination is, as usual, the one with the 
highest total reproductive value – the value of the present clutchplus the parent’s RRV. The value of the present clutch clearly
•• ••Seed weight (g)10010–1 10–2 10–3 10–4 10–5 10–6Open habit, short grass
Woodland marginsWoodland ground floraWoodland shrubsWoodland treesAge of first reproduction (years)
Lifespan (years)100
50
10
5
5 10 50 100 500 1000(c)
Herbs
ShrubsTrees
(angiosperms)
Trees(conifers)SemelparousIteroparity Semelparity
Perennials, including trees
Wild annuals
Grain crops
04 0 10 20 30
Net reproductive allocation (%)
(b)(a)
Figure 4.30 Broadly speaking, plants
show some conformity with the r/K
scheme. For example, trees in relatively 
K-selecting woodland habitats: (a) have 
a relatively high probability of being
iteroparous and a relatively smallreproductive allocation; (b) have relativelylarge seeds; and (c) are relatively long livedwith relatively delayed reproduction. (AfterHarper, 1977; following Salisbury, 1942;Ogden, 1968; Harper & White, 1974.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 125126 CHAPTER 4
increases with clutch size, and the value of each egg also varies
with laying date. What, though, of RRV? This declines withincreases in ‘parental effort’ (i.e. the number of hours per day inﬂight spent hunting in order to raise a clutch of chicks), and parentaleffort, in turn, decreases with increases in the ‘quality’ of a ter-
ritory: the number of prey caught per hunting hour. Thus, RRVis lower: (i) with larger clutches; (ii) at particular, less productivetimes of the year; and (iii) in lower quality territories. On this basis,the total reproductive value of each combination of clutch sizeand date in each territory could be computed, the optimal com-bination predicted (Figure 4.31a) and the predicted and actual com-binations compared in territories of different quality (Figure 4.31b).The correspondence is impressive. Each individual apparentlycomes close to optimizing its clutch size and laying date as an
immediate response to the environment (territory) in which it ﬁnds itself.4.14 Phylogenetic and allometric constraints
The life histories that natural selection favors (and we observe)
are not selected from an unlimited supply but are constrained bythe phylogenetic or taxonomic position that organisms occupy.For example, in the entire order Procellariformes (albatrosses,petrels, fulmars) the clutch size is one, and the birds are ‘prepared’
for this morphologically by having only a single brood patch withwhich they can incubate this one egg (Ashmole, 1971). A bird mightproduce a larger clutch, but this is bound to be a waste unless itexhibits concurrent changes in all the processes in the developmentof the brood patch. Albatrosses are therefore prisoners of theirevolutionary past, as are all organisms.Their life histories can evolve to onlya limited number of options, and theorganisms are therefore conﬁned to a
limited range of habitats.
•• ••Growing season
Habitat property Measured by Short Long
Climate variability s2/x--frost-free days per year 3.05 1.56
Competition Biomass above ground (g m−2) 404 1336
Annual recolonization Winter rhizome mortality (%) 74 5
Annual density variation s2/x--shoot numbers m−22.75 1.51
Plant traits T. angustifolia T. domingensis
Days before ﬂowering 44 70Mean foliage height (cm) 162 186Mean genet weight (g) 12.64 14.34Mean number of fruits per genet 41 8Mean weights of fruits (g) 11.8 21.4Mean total weight of fruits (g) 483 171Table 4.7 Life history traits of two 
Typha (cattail) species, along with
properties of the habitats in which they
grow. ‘ s2/Q’ refers to the variance : mean
ratio, a measure of variability. The cattailsconform to the r/Kscheme. (After
McNaughton, 1975.)
Laying date
April2468
May(b)
35
June7Clutch size
April2467
May(a)
35
JuneOptimal combination
of clutch size andlaying date11.5
1112RV12.5Figure 4.31 Phenotypic plasticity in 
the combination of clutch size and laying
date in the kestrel, Falco tinnunculus , in 
the Netherlands. (a) Within particularterritories (in this case, one of high quality)
the expected, optimal combination is thatwith the highest total reproductive value(for calculation, see text). (b) Predicted(rectangles) and observed (points withstandard deviations) combinations forterritories varying in quality from high(left) to low (right). (After Daan et al. , 
1990; Lessells, 1991.)organisms are
prisoners of theirevolutionary pastEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 126LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 127
It follows from these ‘phylogenetic’ constraints that caution
must be exercised when life histories are compared. The albatrosses,
as a group, may be compared with other types of birds in an attemptto discern a link between the typical albatross life history and the typical albatross habitat. The life histories and habitats of 
two albatross species might reasonably be compared. But if an albatross species is compared with a distantly related bird species,then care must be taken to distinguish between differences attri-butable to habitat (if any) and those attributable to phylogeneticconstraints.
4.14.1 Effects of size and allometry
One element of phylogenetic constraint is that of size. Figure 4.32a
shows the relationship between time to maturity and size (weight)in a wide range of organisms from viruses to whales. Note ﬁrst
that particular groups of organisms are conﬁned to particular 
size ranges. For instance, unicellular organisms cannot exceed acertain size because of their reliance on simple diffusion for thetransfer of oxygen from their cell surface to their internalorganelles. Insects cannot exceed a certain size because of theirreliance on unventilated tracheae for the transfer of gases to andfrom their interiors. Mammals, being endothermic, must exceeda certain size, because at smaller sizes the relatively large bodysurface would dissipate heat faster than the animal could produceit, and so on.
The second point to note is that time to maturity and size are
strongly correlated. In fact, as Figure 4.32a–c illustrates, size is
strongly correlated with many life history components. Since thesizes of organisms are constrained by phylogenetic position,these other life history components will be constrained too.
•• ••
Maturation time (days)0.01
1 fg100,000
Weight10,000
1000
100
10
1.0
0.1(a)
1 pg
1 ng
1 mg
1 g
1 kg
1 tonneMammals
Insects
MicroorganismsMaximum lifespan (days)100,000
10,000
1000
100
10(c)
1 mg
1 g
1 kg
1 tonne10 mg
100 mg
10 g
100 g
10 kg
100 kg0.1 mg
Body weight
Brood time (days)
Body weight (g)100
10
1(b)
Birds
10 11 02105104103Height (m)10
1.0
0.01100
0.1 1.0
Diameter (m)(d)
Mammals, invertebrates, reptiles, amphibians
BirdsFish
1 µg
Figure 4.32 Allometric relationships, all plotted on log scales. (a) Maturation time as a function of body weight for a broad range of
animals. (b) Brood time as a function of maternal body weight in birds. (c) Maximum lifespan as a function of adult body weight  for a
broad range of animals. (After Blueweiss et al. , 1978.) (d) The allometric relationship between tree height and trunk diameter 1.525 m 
from the ground, for 576 individual ‘record’ trees representing nearly every American species. (After McMahon, 1973.)EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 127128 CHAPTER 4
An allometric relationship (see
Gould, 1966) is one in which a phys-
ical or physiological property of an
organism alters relative to the size of the organism. For example, in Figure 4.33a an increase in size (actually volume)
amongst salamander species leads to a decrease in the proportion
of that volume which is allocated to a clutch of young. Likewise,in Figure 4.32b an increase in weight amongst bird species is asso-ciated with a decrease in the time spent brooding eggs per unit
body weight . Such allometric relationships can be ontogenetic
(changes occurring as an organism develops) or phylogenetic(changes that are apparent when related taxa of different sizes arecompared), and it is the latter that are particularly important inthe study of life histories (Figures 4.32 and 4.33).
Why are there allometric relationships? Brieﬂy, if similar
organisms that differed in size retained a geometric similarity 
(i.e. if they were isometric), then all surface areas would increase
as the square of linear size, whilst all volumes and weightsincreased as the cube. An increase in size would then lead todecreases in the length : area ratios, decreases in length : volumeratios and, most important, decreases in area : volume ratios. Almostevery bodily function depends for its efﬁciency on one of theseratios (or a ratio related to them). A change in size amongst 
isometric organisms would thereforelead to a change in efﬁciency.
For example, the transfer of heat, 
or water, or nutrients, either within an
organism or between an organism andits environment, takes place across a surface, which has an area.
The amount of heat produced or water required, however,depends on the volume of the organ or organism concerned. Hence, changes in area : volume ratios resulting from changes in size are bound to lead to changes in the efﬁciency of transfer
per unit volume. Thus, if efﬁciency is to be maintained, this must be done by allometric alterations. Exact allometric slopesvary from system to system and from taxon to taxon (for furtherdiscussion see Gould, 1966; Schmidt-Nielsen, 1984; and, in amore ecological context, Peters, 1983). What, though, is thesigniﬁcance of allometry in the study of life histories?
The usual approach to the ecological study of life histories 
has been to compare the life histories of two or more popula-tions (or species or groups), and to seek to understand the 
differences between them by reference to their environments. Itmust be clear by now, however, that taxa can also differ becausethey lie at different points on the same allometric relationship,or because they are subject to different phylogenetic constraintsgenerally. It is therefore important to disentangle ‘ecological’ differences from allometric and phylogenetic differences (seeHarvey & Pagel, 1991; Harvey, 1996; and also the summary in Stearns, 1992). This is not because the former are ‘adaptive’whereas the latter are not. Indeed, we have seen, for example,that the basis for allometric relationships is a matching of organisms of different sizes to their respective environments.Rather, it is a question of the evolutionary responses of a speciesto its habitat being limited by constraints that have themselves
evolved.
•• ••5.02.5
3.03.03.5(b)
4.0Allometric relationship
from (a)= 0.136Clutch volume
Body volume
Log body volume (mm3)Log total clutch volume (mm3)
5.0 3.02.03.04.0
4.0
Log body volume (mm3)(a)
6.0
Figure 4.33 Allometric relationships between total clutch volume and body volume in female salamanders. (a) The overall relationship
for 74 salamander species, using one mean value per species ( P<0.01). (b) The relationships within a population of Ambystoma tigrinum (×)
(P<0.01), and within a population of A. opacum (7) (P<0.05). The allometric relationship from (a) is shown as a short dashed line: 
A. opacum conforms closely to it; A. tigrinum does not. However, they both lie on an isometric line along which clutch volume is 13.6% 
of body volume ( ). (After Kaplan & Salthe, 1979.)
why are there
allometricrelationships?allometry deﬁnedEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 128LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 129
These ideas are illustrated in Fig-
ure 4.33a, which shows the allometric
relationship between clutch volumeand body volume for salamanders generally. Figure 4.33b then shows the
same relationships in outline; but super-imposed upon it are the allometric
relationships within populations for two salamander species,Ambystoma tigrinum and A. opacum (Kaplan & Salthe, 1979). If 
the species’ means are simply compared, without reference to the general salamander allometry, then the species are seen tohave the same ratio of clutch volume : body volume (0.136).This seems to suggest that the species’ life histories ‘do not dif-fer’, and that there is therefore ‘nothing to explain’ – but any such
suggestion would be wrong. A. opacum conforms closely to the
general salamander relationship. A. tigrinum , on the other hand,
has a clutch volume which is almost twice as large as would beexpected from that relationship. Within the allometric constraintsof being a salamander, A. tigrinum is making a much greater repro-
ductive allocation than A. opacum ; and it would be reasonable 
for an ecologist to look at their respective habitats and seek tounderstand why this might be so.
In other words, it is reasonable to compare taxa from an 
‘ecological’ point of view as long as the allometric relationshiplinking them at a higher taxonomic level is known (Clutton-Brock& Harvey, 1979). It will then be their respective deviations fromthe relationship that form the basis for the comparison. Problems
arise, though, when allometric relationships are unknown (orignored). Without the general salamander allometry in Figure 4.33a,the two species would have seemed similar when in fact they are different. Conversely, two other species might have seemeddifferent when in fact they were simply conforming to the sameallometric relationship. Comparisons oblivious to allometries areclearly perilous, but regrettably, ecologists are frequently oblivi-
ous to allometries. Typically, life histories have been compared,and attempts have been made to explain the differences betweenthem, in terms of habitat differences. As previous sections haveshown, these attempts have often been successful. But they 
have also often been unsuccessful, and unrecognized allometriesundoubtedly go some way towards explaining this.
4.14.2 Effects of phylogeny
The approach used with the salaman-ders, of comparing species or othergroups in terms of their deviations froman allometric relationship that linksthem, has been applied successfully to a number of larger assem-
blages. By removing the effects of size, the approach searches for phylogenetic relationships beyond those associated with size.For example, Figure 4.34 shows, for a number of mammalspecies, that ‘relative’ age at ﬁrst reproduction increases as ‘rela-tive’ life expectancy increases (i.e. relative to a value expected on the basis of an underlying allometry). This shows a powerfulrelationship between these two life history characters once theconfounding effects of size have been removed. It also reveals under-
lying similarities between species of very different sizes: elephants
and otters, and mice and warthogs.
A further impression of the strength of the inﬂuence of 
phylogeny can be gained from analyses like those in Table 4.8
(Read & Harvey, 1989). A nested analysis of variance has beenapplied to the variation in seven life history traits amongst a largenumber of mammal species. This has led to the determination ofthe percentage of the total variance attributable to: (i) differencesbetween species within genera; (ii) differences between generawithin families; and so on. Species vary very little within genera;genera vary little within families. Far and away the largest partof the variance, for all the traits, is accounted for by differencesbetween orders within the mammalian class as a whole. Thisemphasizes that in simply comparing two species from different
orders, we are in essence comparing those orders (which prob-ably diverged many millions of years ago) rather than the speciesthemselves. It does not mean, however, that comparing species
•• ••comparing
salamanders:dangerous ifallometries areignored
removing theconfounding effectsof size
Table 4.8 When nested analyses of variance are performed on data sets for a number of life history traits from a large number of
mammal species, the percentage of the variance is greatest at the highest taxonomic level (orders within the class) and least a t the lowest
level (species within genera). (After Read & Harvey, 1989.)
Trait Species within genera Genera within families Families within orders Orders within the class
Gestation length 2.4 5.8 21.1 70.7
Age at weaning 8.4 11.5 18.9 61.6Age at maturity 10.7 7.2 26.7 55.4Interlitter interval 6.6 13.5 16.1 63.8Maximum lifespan 9.7 10.1 12.4 67.8Neonatal weight 2.9 5.5 26.6 64.9Adult weight 2.9 7.5 21.0 68.5EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 129130 CHAPTER 4
in the same genus, say, is only ‘scratching the surface’. Even when
two species are very similar in their life histories and habitats, ifone makes a greater reproductive allocation and also lives in ahabitat that is lower CR, then this allows us to build a patternlinking the two.
Moreover, the strength of these
relationships at the higher taxonomic
levels does not mean that attempts to relate life histories to lifestyles and
habitats should be abandoned even there, since lifestyles and hab-itats are also constrained by an organism’s size and phylogeneticposition. There may still, therefore, at these higher levels, be patterns linking habitats and life histories rooted in natural selection. For example, insects (small size, many offspring, high
reproductive allocation, frequent semelparity) have been describedas relatively r-selected, compared to mammals (large size, few off-
spring, etc. – relatively K-selected) (Pianka, 1970). Such differences
could be dismissed as being ‘no more’ than the product of anancient evolutionary divergence (Stearns, 1992). But, as we havestressed, an organism’s habitat reﬂects its own responses to itsenvironment. Hence a mammal and an insect living side by sideare also almost certain to experience very different habitats. Thelarger, homeothermic, behaviorally sophisticated, longer livedmammal is likely to maintain a relatively constant population size, subject to frequent competition, and be relatively immunefrom environmental catastrophes and uncertainties. The smaller,poikilothermic, behaviorally unsophisticated, shorter lived insect,
by contrast, is likely to live a relatively opportunistic life, with ahigh probability of unavoidable death. Insects and mammals are
prisoners of their evolutionary past in their range of habitats justas they are in their range of life histories – and the r/K scheme
provides a reasonable (although certainly not perfect) summaryof the patterns linking the two.
The same point is illustrated in a more quantitative way by
an application of the ‘phylogenetic-subtraction’ method (Harvey
& Pagel, 1991) to patterns of covariation in 10 life history traitsof mammals (Stearns, 1983). In the unmanipulated data, the pattern to be expected under the inﬂuence of r/K selection was
pronounced: it accounted for 68% of the covariation. This r/K
inﬂuence was reduced to about 42% when the effects of weightwere removed, and was reduced still further when the trait valueswere replaced in the analysis by their deviations from the mean
value for the family to which the species belonged (33%), or theirorder (32%). In the ﬁrst place, this reafﬁrms the importance ofboth size and phylogeny, since each clearly accounted for muchof the interspeciﬁc variation. It is also signiﬁcant that the r/K pat-
tern remained clearly visible even after these other effects had beenremoved. But the strength of the pattern in the unmanipulateddata set cannot simply be dismissed as an artefact arising out ofphylogenetic naivety. It may well be that important differencesin habitat, too, are associated with an organism’s size, or itsorder or family.
It is undoubtedly true that life 
history ecology cannot proceed oblivi-ous to phylogenetic and allometric constraints. Yet it would 
be unhelpful to see phylogeny as an alternative explanation to 
•• ••a role, still, for
habitat? . . .
...y e s !Figure 4.34 After the effects of size have been removed, age at ﬁrst reproduction increases with life expectancy at birth for 24 species of
mammals. ‘Relative’ refers to the deviation from the underlying allometric relationship linking the character in question to or ganism size.
(After Harvey & Zammuto, 1985.)
Relative age at first reproduction
0.8 0.4 –0.4–1.2–1.2–0.80.00.8
0.0
Relative life expectancy(a)
–0.40.4
–0.8MouseWarthogPig
VoleKobLynxImpalaBeaverHippoSheep
Cottontail rabbitRed squirrelAfrican elephantPikaOtterChipmunk
Relative period of maternal investment
–1.0 0.0 0.5–0.50–1.0–0.250.250.50
–0.5
Relative annual fecundity(b)
0.00Chiroptera
Primates
Sirenia
PerissodactylaProbiscoidea
Carnivora
Rodentia
InsectivoraArtiodactyla
Edentata
Macroscelida
PinnepediaCetacea
LagomorphaEIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 130LIFE, DEATH AND LIFE HISTORIES 131
habitat in seeking to understand life histories. Phylogeny sets 
limits to an organism’s life history and to its habitat. But the essentially ecological task of relating life histories to habitatsremains the most fundamental challenge.
Summary
Ecologists are interested in the numbers of individuals, the dis-tributions of individuals, the demographic processes (birth, deathand migration) that inﬂuence these, and the ways in which thesedemographic processes are themselves inﬂuenced by environmentalfactors.
Not all individuals are alike, especially amongst modular, as
opposed to unitary, organisms. The growth forms of modular
organisms are described, as well the nature and ecological import-ance of senescence and physiological integration in modularorganisms. Ecology necessarily involves counting individuals ormodules. A population is a group of individuals of one species,though what constitutes a population will vary from study to study.It is often most convenient to consider the density as opposed tothe size of a population. Methods of estimating population size
or density are described brieﬂy.
We explain the variety of patterns of life cycle, including the
distinction between semelparous and iteroparous species. Basicmethods of quantiﬁcation of these include life tables, survivor-ship curves and fecundity schedules. For annual species, cohortlife tables can be constructed, the elements of which aredescribed. A summary term of this and a fecundity schedule isthe basic reproductive rate, R
0. The survivorship curves that
emerge from a life table can be classiﬁed into three broad types.
However, a variety of features, including seed banks, mean thatthere are many not-quite-annual species.
For individuals with repeated breeding seasons, it may also 
be possible to construct cohort life tables; a static life table is an
imperfect alternative that must be interpreted with caution.We explain how basic reproductive rates, R
0, generation
lengths and population rates of increase are interrelated when 
generations overlap, leading to deﬁnitions of the fundamental netreproductive rate, R, and the intrinsic rate of natural increase, 
r(=ln R). We explain, too, how these may be estimated from
life tables and fecundity schedules, and move on to describe the
population projection matrix, a more powerful method of ana-lyzing and interpreting fecundity and survival schedules when generations overlap.
Three different types of question that are commonly asked about
the evolution of life histories are described. Most answers to thesequestions have been based on the idea of optimization. Thecomponents of life histories, and their ecological importance, are also described: size, development rate, semel- or iteroparity,
clutch size, offspring size and some composite measures – reproductive allocation and especially reproductive value.
Trade-offs are central to an understanding of life history 
evolution, though they may be difﬁcult to observe in practice. Keytrade-offs are those that reveal an apparent ‘cost of reproduction’in terms of a decrease in residual reproductive value. Another isthat between the number and ﬁtness of offspring.
To address the question of whether there are patterns linking
particular types of life history to particular types of habitat, theconcepts of options sets and ﬁtness contours are introduced,leading to a general, comparative classiﬁcation of habitats. Armedwith this, light is thrown on patterns in reproductive allocationand its timing, the optimal size and number of offspring. We 
explain the concept of rand Kselection, its limitations and the
evidence for it. We explain, too, that patterns in the phenotypicplasticity of life histories may equally be governed by natural selection.
Finally, the effects of phylogenetic and allometric constraints
on the evolution of life histories are discussed – especially the effectsof size – but end with the conclusion that the essentially eco-logical task of relating life histories to habitats remains the mostfundamental challenge.
•• ••EIPC04  10/24/05  1:49 PM  Page 131••5.1 Introduction
Organisms grow, reproduce and die (Chapter 4). They are
affected by the conditions in which they live (Chapter 2), and bythe resources that they obtain (Chapter 3). But no organism livesin isolation. Each, for at least part of its life, is a member of apopulation composed of individuals of its own species.
Individuals of the same species have
very similar requirements for survival,
growth and reproduction; but theircombined demand for a resource may
exceed the immediate supply. The individuals then compete forthe resource and, not surprisingly, at least some of them becomedeprived. This chapter is concerned with the nature of suchintraspeciﬁc competition, its effects on the competing individualsand on populations of competing individuals. We begin with a
working deﬁnition: ‘competition is an interaction between indi-viduals, brought about by a shared requirement for a resource,and leading to a reduction in the survivorship, growth and/or reproduction of at least some of the competing individuals concerned’. We can now look more closely at competition.
Consider, initially, a simple hypothetical community: a thriv-
ing population of grasshoppers (all of one species) feeding on aﬁeld of grass (also of one species). To provide themselves withenergy and material for growth and reproduction, grasshopperseat grass; but in order to ﬁnd and consume that grass they mustuse energy. Any grasshopper might ﬁnd itself at a spot where there is no grass because some other grasshopper has eaten it.The grasshopper must then move on and expend more energy
before it takes in food. The more grasshoppers there are, the moreoften this will happen. An increased energy expenditure and adecreased rate of food intake may all decrease a grasshopper’schances of survival, and also leave less energy available for devel-opment and reproduction. Survival and reproduction determinea grasshopper’s contribution to the next generation. Hence, themore intraspeciﬁc competitors for food a grasshopper has, the less
its likely contribution will be.
As far as the grass itself is concerned, an isolated seedling in
fertile soil may have a very high chance of surviving to repro-ductive maturity. It will probably exhibit an extensive amount ofmodular growth, and will probably therefore eventually producea large number of seeds. However, a seedling that is closely sur-
rounded by neighbors (shading it with their leaves and depleting
the water and nutrients of its soil with their roots) will be veryunlikely to survive, and if it does, will almost certainly form fewmodules and set few seeds.
We can see immediately that the ultimate effect of com-
petition on an individual is a decreased contribution to the nextgeneration compared with what would have happened had therebeen no competitors. Intraspeciﬁc competition typically leads to
decreased rates of resource intake per individual, and thus todecreased rates of individual growth or development, or perhapsto decreases in the amounts of stored reserves or to increased risksof predation. These may lead, in turn, to decreases in survivor-ship and/or decreases in fecundity, which together determine anindividual’s reproductive output.
5.1.1 Exploitation and interference
In many cases, competing individuals do
not interact with one another directly.Instead, individuals respond to the level of a resource, which hasbeen depressed by the presence and activity of other individuals.The grasshoppers were one example. Similarly, a competing grass
plant is adversely affected by the presence of close neighbors,because the zone from which it extracts resources (light, water,nutrients) has been overlapped by the ‘resource depletion zones’of these neighbors, making it more difﬁcult to extract thoseresources. In such cases, competition may be described asa deﬁnition of
competition
exploitation
Chapter 5
Intraspecific Competition
EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 132INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 133
exploitation , in that each individual is affected by the amount of
resource that remains after that resource has been exploited by
others. Exploitation can only occur, therefore, if the resource inquestion is in limited supply.
In many other cases, competition
takes the form of interference . Here
individuals interact directly with each
other, and one individual will actually prevent another from
exploiting the resources within a portion of the habitat. Forinstance, this is seen amongst animals that defend territories (seeSection 5.11) and amongst the sessile animals and plants that liveon rocky shores. The presence of a barnacle on a rock preventsany other barnacle from occupying that same position, eventhough the supply of food at that position may exceed the
requirements of several barnacles. In such cases, space can be seenas a resource in limited supply. Another type of interference competition occurs when, for instance, two red deer stags ﬁghtfor access to a harem of hinds. Either stag, alone, could readilymate with all the hinds, but they cannot both do so since matings are limited to the ‘owner’ of the harem.
Thus, interference competition may occur for a resource of
real value (e.g. space on a rocky shore for a barnacle), in whichcase the interference is accompanied by a degree of exploitation,or for a surrogate resource (a territory, or ownership of a harem),which is only valuable because of the access it provides to a realresource (food, or females). With exploitation, the intensity of com-petition is closely linked to the level of resource present and the
level required, but with interference, intensity may be high evenwhen the level of the real resource is not limiting.In practice, many examples of competition probably include
elements of both exploitation and interference. For instance,
adult cave beetles, Neapheanops tellkampﬁ , in Great Onyx Cave,
Kentucky, compete amongst themselves but with no otherspecies and have only one type of food – cricket eggs, which they
obtain by digging holes in the sandy ﬂoor of the cave. On theone hand, they suffer indirectly from exploitation: beetles reducethe density of their resource (cricket eggs) and then have markedlylower fecundity when food availability is low (Figure 5.1a). But they also suffer directly from interference: at higher beetle densities they ﬁght more, forage less, dig fewer and shallower holes and eat far fewer eggs than could be accounted for by food depletion alone (Figure 5.1b).
5.1.2 One-sided competition
Whether they compete through exploitation or interference,
individuals within a species have many fundamental features incommon, using similar resources and reacting in much the sameway to conditions. None the less, intraspeciﬁc competition maybe very one sided: a strong, early seedling will shade a stunted,
late one; an older and larger bryozoan on the shore will growover a smaller and younger one. One example is shown inFigure 5.2. The overwinter survival of red deer calves in theresource-limited population on the island of Rhum, Scotland (seeChapter 4) declined sharply as the population became morecrowded, but those that were smallest at birth were by far themost likely to die. Hence, the ultimate effect of competition is
••interference020Fecundity (eggs per female)(a)
15
10
M ASONDJF A J JM
1986 1987Crickets
Beetles5
0Holes per beetle per day(b)
0.5
124
Beetle numbers per bowl0Hole depth (mm)6
12412
0Egss eaten per beetle
1241
Figure 5.1 Intraspeciﬁc competition amongst cave beetles ( Neapheanops tellkampﬁ ). (a) Exploitation. Beetle fecundity is signiﬁcantly
correlated ( r=0.86) with cricket fecundity (itself a good measure of the availability of cricket eggs – the beetles’ food). The beetles
themselves reduce the density of cricket eggs. (b) Interference. As beetle density in experimental arenas with 10 cricket eggs increased 
from 1 to 2 to 4, individual beetles dug fewer and shallower holes in search of their food, and ultimately ate much less ( P<0.001 in 
each case), in spite of the fact that 10 cricket eggs was sufﬁcient to satiate them all. Means and standard deviations are give n in each case.
(After Grifﬁth & Poulson, 1993.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 133134 CHAPTER 5
far from being the same for every individual. Weak competitors
may make only a small contribution to the next generation, orno contribution at all. Strong competitors may have their con-tribution only negligibly affected.
Finally, note that the likely effect of intraspeciﬁc competition
on any individual is greater the more competitors there are. 
The effects of intraspeciﬁc competition are thus said to be density dependent. We turn next to a more detailed look at thedensity-dependent effects of intraspeciﬁc competition on death,birth and growth.
5.2 Intraspeciﬁc competition, and density-
dependent mortality and fecundity
Figure 5.3 shows the pattern of mortality in the ﬂour beetle
Tribolium confusum when cohorts were reared at a range of 
densities. Known numbers of eggs were placed in glass tubes with 0.5 g of a ﬂour–yeast mixture, and the number of indi-viduals that survived to become adults in each tube was noted.
The same data have been expressed in three ways, and in eachcase the resultant curve has been divided into three regions.Figure 5.3a describes the relationship between density and the per
capita mortality rate – literally, the mortality rate ‘per head’, i.e.
the probability of an individual dying or the proportion that diedbetween the egg and adult stages. Figure 5.3b describes how thenumber that died prior to the adult stage changed with density;and Figure 5.3c describes the relationship between density andthe numbers that survived.Throughout region 1 (low density) the mortality rate
remained constant as density was increased (Figure 5.3a). The num-
bers dying and the numbers surviving both rose (Figure 5.3b, c)
(not surprising, given that the numbers ‘available’ to die and sur-vive increased), but the proportion dying remained the same, whichaccounts for the straight lines in region 1 of these ﬁgures.Mortality in this region is said to be density independent.
Individuals died, but the chance of an individual surviving tobecome an adult was not changed by the initial density. Judgedby this, there was no intraspeciﬁc competition between the bee-tles at these densities. Such density-independent deaths affect thepopulation at all densities. They represent a baseline, which any
density-dependent mortality will exceed.
In region 2, the mortality rate
increased with density (Figure 5.3a):there was density-dependent mortality.The numbers dying continued to risewith density, but unlike region 1 they did so more than propor-tionately (Figure 5.3b). The numbers surviving also continued torise, but this time less than proportionately (Figure 5.3c). Thus,
over this range, increases in egg density continued to lead toincreases in the total number of surviving adults. The mortality ratehad increased, but it ‘undercompensated’ for increases in density.
In region 3, intraspeciﬁc competition
was even more intense. The increasingmortality rate ‘overcompensated’ forany increase in density, i.e. over thisrange, the more eggs there were present, the fewer adults sur-vived: an increase in the initial number of eggs led to an even
•• ••0.250.350.95
0.450.550.650.750.85
4.09.0
5.06.07.08.050
1501301109070
170Probability of winter survival0.250.350.95
0.450.550.650.750.85
Birth weight (kg)Hind population size
Figure 5.2 Those red deer that are
smallest when born are the least likely 
to survive over winter when, at higherdensities, survival declines. (After Clutton-Brock et al. , 1987.)
undercompensating
density dependence
overcompensatingdensity dependenceEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 134INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 135
greater proportional increase in the mortality rate. Indeed, if the
range of densities had been extended, there would have been tubeswith no survivors: the developing beetles would have eaten allthe available food before any of them reached the adult stage.
A slightly different situation is
shown in Figure 5.4. This illustrates
the relationship between density andmortality in young trout. At the lower
densities there was undercompensating density dependence, butat higher densities mortality never overcompensated. Rather, itcompensated exactly for any increase in density: any rise in thenumber of fry was matched by an exactly equivalent rise in themortality rate. The number of survivors therefore approached and
maintained a constant level, irrespective of initial density.
The patterns of density-dependent
fecundity that result from intraspeciﬁccompetition are, in a sense, a mirror-
image of those for mortality (Figure 5.5).Here, though, the per capita birth ratefalls as intraspeciﬁc competition intensiﬁes. At low enough den-sities, the birth rate may be density independent (Figure 5.5a, lowerdensities). But as density increases, and the effects of intraspeciﬁccompetition become apparent, birth rate initially shows under-compensating density dependence (Figure 5.5a, higher densities),and may then show exactly compensating density dependence(Figure 5.5b, throughout; Figure 5.5c, lower densities) or over-
compensating density dependence (Figure 5.5c, higher densities).
Thus, to summarize, irrespective of variations in over- and
undercompensation, the essential point is a simple one: at appro-priate densities, intraspeciﬁc competition can lead to density-dependent mortality and/or fecundity, which means that thedeath rate increases and/or the birth rate decreases as densityincreases. Thus, whenever there is intraspeciﬁc competition, itseffect, whether on survival, fecundity or a combination of the two,is density dependent. However, as subsequent chapters willshow, there are processes other than intraspeciﬁc competition thatalso have density-dependent effects.
5.3 Density or crowding?
Of course, the intensity of intraspeciﬁc competition experienced
by an individual is not really determined by the density of thepopulation as a whole. The effect on an individual is determined,
•• ••
Number dying
140 100 02060140
60
Initial egg number(b)
20123 100Mortality rate
140 100 00.20.61.0
60(a)
201
23
Number surviving
140 100 051535
60(c)
2012
3
25
1030
20
Figure 5.3 Density-dependent mortality in the ﬂour beetle Tribolium confusum : (a) as it affects mortality rate, (b) as it affects the numbers
dying, and (c) as it affects the numbers surviving. In region 1 mortality is density independent; in region 2 there is undercom pensating
density-dependent mortality; in region 3 there is overcompensating density-dependent mortality. (After Bellows, 1981.)
exactly compensating
density dependenceintraspeciﬁccompetition andfecundityLog10 final trout density (m–2)
Log10 initial trout density (m–2)1.5
1.00.5
0
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
Figure 5.4 An exactly compensating density-dependent effect on
mortality: the number of surviving trout fry is independent of
initial density at higher densities. (After Le Cren, 1973.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 135136 CHAPTER 5
rather, by the extent to which it is crowded or inhibited by its
immediate neighbors.
One way of emphasizing this is by noting that there are actu-
ally at least three different meanings of ‘density’ (see Lewontin& Levins, 1989, where details of calculations and terms can be
found). Consider a population of insects, distributed over a popu-lation of plants on which they feed. This is a typical example ofa very general phenomenon – a population (the insects in this case)being distributed amongst different patches of a resource (theplants). The density would usually be calculated as the numberof insects (let us say 1000) divided by the number of plants (say100), i.e. 10 insects per plant. This, which we would normally callsimply the ‘density’, is actually the ‘resource-weighted density’.However, it gives an accurate measure of the intensity of com-
petition suffered by the insects (the extent to which they arecrowded) only if there are exactly 10 insects on every plant andevery plant is the same size.
Suppose, instead, that 10 of the
plants support 91 insects each, and theremaining 90 support just one insect.The resource-weighted density would
still be 10 insects per plant. But the average density experiencedby the insects would be 82.9 insects per plant. That is, one addsup the densities experienced by each of the insects (91 +91+91
...+1+1) and divides by the total number of insects. This is the
‘organism-weighted density’, and it clearly gives a much more 
satisfactory measure of the intensity of competition the insectsare likely to suffer.
However, there remains the further question of the average
density of insects experienced by the plants. This, which may be
referred to as the ‘exploitation pressure’, comes out at 1.1 insectsper plant, reﬂecting the fact that most of the plants support onlyone insect.
What, then, is the density of the insect? Clearly, it depends 
on whether you answer from the perspective of the insect or theplant – but whichever way you look at it, the normal practice of calculating the resource-weighted density and calling it the 
‘density’ looks highly suspect. The difference between resource-and organism-weighted densities is illustrated for the humanpopulation of a number of US states in Table 5.1 (where the‘resource’ is simply land area). The organism-weighted densitiesare so much larger than the usual, but rather unhelpful, resource-weighted densities essentially because most people live, crowded,in cities (Lewontin & Levins, 1989).
The difﬁculties of relying on density to characterize the
potential intensity of intraspeciﬁc competition are particularly 
•• ••104
103
102
103 102
 Number of flowering plants per 0.25 m2Number of seeds per 0.25 m2
104105
10
5
0
100 10
Dose (spores ml–1)Number of spores (millions)
100,000(c)
20
1000 10,00015105100
10–1
103 102
 Number of flowering plants per 0.25 m2Number of seeds per plant
104(a)
101
105
10
0
2 0
Attack density (no. 100 cm−2)Eggs per attack
8(b)
70
462030405060
10Figure 5.5 (a) The fecundity (seeds per
plant) of the annual dune plant Vulpia
fasciculata is constant at the lowest densities 
(density independence, left). However, at
higher densities, fecundity declines but in
an undercompensating fashion, such thatthe total number of seeds continues to rise(right). (After Watkinson & Harper, 1978.)(b) Fecundity (eggs per attack) in thesouthern pine beetle, Dendroctonus frontalis , 
in East Texas declines with increasing attack density in a way that compensates more orless exactly for the density increases: the total number of eggs produced was roughly 
100 per 100 cm
2, irrespective of attack
density over the range observed ( /H17033, 1992; 
/H17033, 1993). (After Reeve et al. , 1998.) (c) When 
the planktonic crustacean Daphnia magna
was infected with varying numbers of 
spores of the bacterium Pasteuria ramosa , the 
total number of spores produced per host
in the next generation was independent ofdensity (exactly compensating) at the lowerdensities, but declined with increasingdensity (overcompensating) at the higherdensities. Standard errors are shown. (After Ebert et al. , 2000.)
three meanings 
of densityEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 136INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 137
acute with sessile, modular organisms, because, being sessile, they
compete almost entirely only with their immediate neighbors, andbeing modular, competition is directed most at the modules thatare closest to those neighbors. Thus, for instance, when silver birchtrees ( Betula pendula ) were grown in small groups, the sides of 
individual trees that interfaced with neighbors typically had a lower
‘birth’ and higher death rate of buds (see Section 4.2); whereason sides of the same trees with no interference, bud birth ratewas higher, death rate lower, branches were longer and the formapproached that of an open-grown individual (Figure 5.6). Dif-ferent modules experience different intensities of competition, andquoting the density at which an individual was growing wouldbe all but pointless.
Thus, whether mobile or sessile,
different individuals meet or suffer
from different numbers of competitors.Density, especially resource-weighteddensity, is an abstraction that applies to the population as awhole but need not apply to any of the individuals within it. None the less, density may often be the most convenient way ofexpressing the degree to which individuals are crowded – and itis certainly the way it has usually been expressed.
•• ••Table 5.1 A comparison of the resource- and organism-weighted
densities of ﬁve states, based on the 1960 USA census, where 
the ‘resource patches’ are the counties within each state. (AfterLewontin & Levins, 1989.)
Resource-weighted Organism-weighted 
State density (km−2) density (km−2)
Colorado 44 6,252
Missouri 159 6,525New York 896 48,714Utah 28 684Virginia 207 13,824
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
Age of branch (years)Relative bud production rate
3454
2
02345
Age of branch (years)(a) (b)
Low
LowLowHigh
HighHighMedium
Medium
MediumMediumMedium
MediumNet bud productiondensity: a convenient
expression ofcrowding
Figure 5.6 Mean relative bud production
(new buds per existing bud) for silver 
birch trees ( Betula pendula ), expressed 
(a) as gross bud production and (b) as netbud production (birth minus death), in
different interference zones. These zonesare themselves explained in the inset. 
/H17033, high interference; 3, medium; 7, low.
Bars represent standard errors. (After Jones
& Harper, 1987.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 137138 CHAPTER 5
5.4 Intraspeciﬁc competition and the regulation
of population size
There are, then, typical patterns in the effects of intraspeciﬁc 
competition on birth and death (see Figures 5.3–5.5). These gen-eralized patterns are summarized in Figures 5.7 and 5.8.5.4.1 Carrying capacities
Figure 5.7a–c reiterates the fact that as density increases, the percapita birth rate eventually falls and the per capita death rate even-tually rises. There must, therefore, be a density at which thesecurves cross. At densities below this point, the birth rate exceeds
•• ••K(a)
MortalityBirth
K(b)
K(c)
‘K’(d)
Mortality
Birth
Density
Net recruitment
Density(b)
KNet recruitment
Density(a)
KNumber of births
Number dying
Population sizeK
Time(c)
E
D
C
B AFGHIKJ
Figure 5.8 Some general aspects of intraspeciﬁc competition. (a) Density-dependent effects on the numbers dying and the number 
of births in a population: net recruitment is ‘births minus deaths’. Hence, as shown in (b), the density-dependent effect of in traspeciﬁc
competition on net recruitment is a domed or ‘n’-shaped curve. (c) A population increasing in size under the inﬂuence of the re lationships
in (a) and (b). Each arrow represents the change in size of the population over one interval of time. Change (i.e. net recruitm ent) is small
when density is low (i.e. at small population sizes: A to B, B to C) and is small close to the carrying capacity (I to J, J to K), but is large at
intermediate densities (E to F). The result is an ‘S’-shaped or sigmoidal pattern of population increase, approaching the carry ing capacity.Figure 5.7 Density-dependent birth and
mortality rates lead to the regulation of
population size. When both are densitydependent (a), or when either of them is(b, c), their two curves cross. The densityat which they do so is called the carryingcapacity ( K). Below this the population
increases, above it the populationdecreases: Kis a stable equilibrium.
However, these ﬁgures are the grossest ofcaricatures. The situation is closer to thatshown in (d), where mortality rate broadlyincreases, and birth rate broadly decreases,with density. It is possible, therefore, forthe two rates to balance not at just onedensity, but over a broad range ofdensities, and it is towards this broad range that other densities tend to move.EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 138INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 139
the death rate and the population increases in size. At densities
above the crossover point, the death rate exceeds the birth rateand the population declines. At the crossover density itself, thetwo rates are equal and there is no net change in population size. This density therefore represents a stable equilibrium, in 
that all other densities will tend to approach it. In other words,intraspeciﬁc competition, by acting on birth rates and deathrates, can regulate populations at a stable density at which thebirth rate equals the death rate. This density is known as the carrying capacity of the population and is usually denoted by K
(Figure 5.7). It is called a carrying capacity because it representsthe population size that the resources of the environment can just maintain (‘carry’) without a tendency to either increase ordecrease.
However, whilst hypothetical popu-
lations caricatured by line drawings like
Figures 5.7a–c can be characterized bya simple carrying capacity, this is nottrue of any natural population. There
are unpredictable environmental ﬂuctuations; individuals areaffected by a whole wealth of factors of which intraspeciﬁc competition is only one; and resources not only affect density but
respond to density as well. Hence, the situation is likely to be closerto that depicted in Figure 5.7d. Intraspeciﬁc competition does nothold natural populations to a predictable and unchanging level(the carrying capacity), but it may act upon a very wide range of
starting densities and bring them to a much narrower range ofﬁnal densities, and it therefore tends to keep density within cer-tain limits. It is in this sense that intraspeciﬁc competition maybe said typically to be capable of regulating population size. Forinstance, Figure 5.9 shows the ﬂuctuations within and betweenyears in populations of the brown trout ( Salmo trutta ) and the
grasshopper, Chorthippus brunneus . There are no simple carrying
capacities in these examples, but there are clear tendencies for the‘ﬁnal’ density each year (‘late summer numbers’ in the ﬁrst case,
‘adults’ in the second) to be relatively constant, despite the largeﬂuctuations in density within each year and the obvious poten-tial for increase that both populations possess.
In fact, the concept of a population settling at a stable carry-
ing capacity, even in caricatured populations, is relevant only tosituations in which density dependence is not strongly overcom-pensating. Where there is overcompensation, cycles or even
•• ••0140Early summer numbers (   )(a)
120
80
198240
1984 1968 1980 1978 1976 1972 1974 1970100
60
20
5.0Log10 numbers(b)
19474.0
1951 1949 1950 19483.003
2
1
Late summer
 numbers (   )
YearFigure 5.9 Population regulation in
practice. (a) Brown trout ( Salmo trutta ) in 
an English Lake District stream. 5, numbers 
in early summer, including those newly
hatched from eggs; 7, numbers in late
summer. Note the difference in verticalscales. (After Elliott, 1984.) (b) Thegrasshopper, Chorthippus brunneus , in
southern England. 
/H17033, eggs; 9, nymphs; 
7, adults. Note the logarithmic scale. 
(After Richards & Waloff, 1954.) There areno deﬁnitive carrying capacities, but the‘ﬁnal’ densities each year (‘late summer’and ‘adults’) are relatively constant despite
large ﬂuctuations within years.real populations lack
simple carryingcapacitiesEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 139140 CHAPTER 5
chaotic changes in population size may be the result. We return
to this point later (see Section 5.8).
5.4.2 Net recruitment curves
An alternative general view of intraspeciﬁc competition is shownin Figure 5.8a, which deals with numbers rather than rates. Thedifference there between the two curves (‘births minus deaths’or ‘net recruitment’) is the net number of additions expected inthe population during the appropriate stage or over one interval
of time. Because of the shapes of the birth and death curves, thenet number of additions is small at the lowest densities, increasesas density rises, declines again as the carrying capacity is appro-ached and is then negative (deaths exceed births) when the ini-tial density exceeds K(Figure 5.8b). Thus, total recruitment into
a population is small when there are few individuals available togive birth, and small when intraspeciﬁc competition is intense. Itreaches a peak, i.e. the population increases in size most rapidly,at some intermediate density.
The precise nature of the relation-
ship between a population’s net rate 
of recruitment and its density varieswith the detailed biology of the speciesconcerned (e.g. the trout, clover plants,herring and whales in Figure 5.10a–d).
Moreover, because recruitment is affected by a whole multiplicityof factors, the data points rarely fall exactly on any single curve. Yet,in each case in Figure 5.10, a domed curve is apparent. This reﬂects
the general nature of density-dependent birth and death wheneverthere is intraspeciﬁc competition. Note also that one of these (Fig-
ure 5.10b) is modular: it describes the relationship between theleaf area index (LAI) of a plant population (the total leaf area beingborne per unit area of ground) and the population’s growth rate(modular birth minus modular death). The growth rate is low whenthere are few leaves, peaks at an intermediate LAI, and is thenlow again at a high LAI, where there is much mutual shading andcompetition and many leaves may be consuming more in respi-ration than they contribute through photosynthesis.
5.4.3 Sigmoidal growth curves
In addition, curves of the type shown in Figure 5.8a and b maybe used to suggest the pattern by which a population might increasefrom an initially very small size (e.g. when a species colonizes apreviously unoccupied area). This is illustrated in Figure 5.8c.Imagine a small population, well below the carrying capacity of
its environment (point A). Because the population is small, itincreases in size only slightly during one time interval, and onlyreaches point B. Now, however, being larger, it increases in sizemore rapidly during the next time interval (to point C), and evenmore during the next (to point D). This process continues untilthe population passes beyond the peak of its net recruitment curve(Figure 5.8b). Thereafter, the population increases in size less and less with each time interval until the population reaches its
•• ••500
400300
200
100
0
2000 4000 6000 8000R (fish 60m–2)
Eggs per 60m2(a)
25
0246Crop growth rate
(g m–2 day–1)
Leaf area index8(b)
020
15
10
51.251.72.12.53
0.8 0.4
8
64200 200 400 600 1000Recruits (age 2) × 106
Spawning stock biomass (tonnes)800(c)(d)
12
10
86420100 200 300 400Net recruitment
(1000s)
Fin whale stock 5 years earlier (1000s)0Figure 5.10 Some dome-shaped 
net-recruitment curves. (a) Six-month old
brown trout, Salmo trutta , in Black Brows
Beck, UK, between 1967 and 1989. (AfterMyers, 2001; following Elliott, 1994.) 
(b) The relationship between crop growthrate of subterranean clover, Trifolium
subterraneum , and leaf area index at various
intensities of radiation (kJ cm
−2day−1).
(After Black, 1963.) (c) ‘Blackwater’ herring,
Clupea harengus , from the Thames estuary
between 1962 and 1997. (After Fox, 2001.)(d) Estimates for the stock of Antarctic ﬁn
whales. (After Allen, 1972.)peak recruitment
occurs atintermediatedensitiesEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 140INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 141
carrying capacity ( K) and ceases completely to increase in size.
The population might therefore be expected to follow an S-shaped
or ‘sigmoidal’ curve as it rises from a low density to its carryingcapacity. This is a consequence of the hump in its recruitmentrate curve, which is itself a consequence of intraspeciﬁc competition.
Of course, Figure 5.8c, like the rest of Figure 5.8, is a gross
simpliﬁcation. It assumes, apart from anything else, that changes
in population size are affected only by intraspeciﬁc competition.Nevertheless, something akin to sigmoidal population growth can be perceived in many natural and experimental situations(Figure 5.11).
Intraspeciﬁc competition will be obvious in certain cases
(such as overgrowth competition between sessile organisms on a rocky shore), but this will not be true of every population
examined. Individuals are also affected by predators, parasites andprey, competitors from other species, and the many facets of theirphysical and chemical environment. Any of these may outweighor obscure the effects of intraspeciﬁc competition; or the effectof these other factors at one stage may reduce the density to well below the carrying capacity for all subsequent stages.Nevertheless, intraspeciﬁc competition probably affects mostpopulations at least sometimes during at least one stage of theirlife cycle.
5.5 Intraspeciﬁc competition and density-
dependent growth
Intraspeciﬁc competition, then, can have a profound effect on the
number of individuals in a population; but it can have an equallyprofound effect on the individuals themselves. In populations of
unitary organisms, rates of growth and rates of development arecommonly inﬂuenced by intraspeciﬁc competition. This necessarily
leads to density-dependent effects on the composition of a popu-lation. For instance, Figure 5.12a and b shows two examples in which individuals were typically smaller at higher densities. This, in turn, often means that although the numerical size of apopulation is regulated only approximately by intraspeciﬁc com-petition, the total biomass is regulated much more precisely. This,too, is illustrated by the limpets in Figure 5.12b.
5.5.1 The law of constant ﬁnal yield
Such effects are particularly marked in modular organisms. For
example, when carrot seeds ( Daucus carrota ) were sown at a
range of densities, the yield per pot at the ﬁrst harvest (29 days)increased with the density of seeds sown (Figure 5.13). After 62 days, however, and even more after 76 and 90 days, yield no
longer reﬂected the numbers sown. Rather it was the same overa wide range of initial densities, especially at higher densities wherecompetition was most intense. This pattern has frequently beennoted by plant ecologists and has been called the ‘law of constantﬁnal yield’ (Kira et al. , 1953). Individuals suffer density-dependent
reductions in growth rate, and thus in individual plant size,which tend to compensate exactly for increases in density (hencethe constant ﬁnal yield). This suggests, of course, that there arelimited resources available for plant growth, especially at high dens-
ities, which is borne out in Figure 5.13 by the higher (constant)yields at higher nutrient levels.
•• ••3
Time (h)0L. sakei (g CDM l−1)
10 20 302
1(a)
60
Year1960Animals per km2
1970 1980(b)
40
20
100
50Cumulative shoot number(c)
50
Month100 150 200 250 300
NDJ FMAMJ J ANo.
of days
Figure 5.11 Real examples of S-shaped population increase. (a) The bacterium Lactobacillus sakei (measured as grams of ‘cell dry mass’
(CDM) per liter) grown in nutrient broth. (After Leroy & de Vuyst, 2001.) (b) The population of wildebeest Connochaetes taurinus , of the
Serengeti region of Tanzania and Kenya seems to be leveling off after rising from a low density caused by the disease rinderpes t. (After
Sinclair & Norton-Grifﬁths, 1982; Deshmukh, 1986.) (c) The population of shoots of the annual Juncus gerardi in a salt marsh habitat on 
the west coast of France. (After Bouzille et al. , 1997.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 141142 CHAPTER 5
Yield is density ( d) multiplied by mean weight per plant ( P).
Thus, if yield is constant ( c):
dP=c, (5.1)
and so:
logd+logP=logc (5.2)
and:
logP=logc−1 · log d (5.3)
and thus, a plot of log mean weight against log density should
have a slope of −1.
Data on the effects of density on the growth of the grass Vulpia
fasciculata are shown in Figure 5.14, and the slope of the curvetowards the end of the experiment does indeed approach a value
of −1. Here too, as with the carrot plants, individual plant weight
at the ﬁrst harvest was reduced only at very high densities – butas the plants became larger, they interfered with each other atsuccessively lower densities.
The constancy of the ﬁnal yield is a
result, to a large extent, of the modu-larity of plants. This was clear whenperennial rye grass ( Lolium perenne ) was sown at a 30-fold range
of densities (Figure 5.15). After 180 days some genets had died;
but the range of ﬁnal tiller (module) densities was far narrowerthan that of genets (individuals). The regulatory powers ofintraspeciﬁc competition were operating largely by affecting thenumber of modules per genet rather than the number of genetsthemselves.
5.6 Quantifying intraspeciﬁc competition
Every population is unique. Nevertheless, we have already seen
that there are general patterns in the action of intraspeciﬁc competition. In this section we take such generalizations a stage further. A method will be described, utilizing kvalues (see
Chapter 4) to summarize the effects of intraspeciﬁc competition
on mortality, fecundity and growth. Mortality will be dealt withﬁrst. The method will then be extended for use with fecundityand growth.
A kvalue was deﬁned by the 
formula:
k=log (initial density) −log (ﬁnal density), (5.4)
or, equivalently:
k=log (initial density/ﬁnal density). (5.5)
For present purposes, ‘initial density’ may be denoted by B, stand-
ing for ‘numbers before the action of intraspeciﬁc competition’,
whilst ‘ﬁnal density’ may be denoted by A, standing for ‘numbers
after the action of intraspeciﬁc competition’. Thus:
k=log ( B/A). (5.6)
Note that kincreases as mortality rate increases.
Some examples of the effects of
intraspeciﬁc competition on mortality
are shown in Figure 5.16, in which kis
plotted against log B. In several cases,
kis constant at the lowest densities. This is an indication of 
density independence: the proportion surviving is not correlatedwith initial density. At higher densities, kincreases with initial 
density; this indicates density dependence. Most importantly,
•• ••70Maximum length (mm)
120040
05060
800
Density (m–2)(b)
400
Biomass (g m–2)
50125
1007525Jawbone length (cm)
423024
3
Numbers per km2(a)
2 1
Figure 5.12 (a) Jawbone length indicates that reindeer grow 
to a larger size at lower densities. (After Skogland, 1983.) (b) In
populations of the limpet Patella cochlear , individual size declines
with density leading to an exact regulation of the population’sbiomass. (After Branch, 1975.)constant yield and
modularity
use of kvalues
plots of kagainst log
densityEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 142INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 143
however, the way in which kvaries with the logarithm of den-
sity indicates the precise nature of the density dependence. For
example, Figure 5.16a and b describes, respectively, situations inwhich there is under- and exact compensation at higher densities.The exact compensation in Figure 5.16b is indicated by the 
slope of the curve (denoted by b) taking a constant value of 1 (the
mathematically inclined will see that this follows from the factthat with exact compensation Ais constant). The undercom-
pensation that preceded this at lower densities, and which is seenin Figure 5.16a even at higher densities, is indicated by the factthat bis less than 1.
Exact compensation ( b=1) is often
referred to as pure contest competition,because there are a constant number ofwinners (survivors) in the competitive process. The term was 
initially proposed by Nicholson (1954), who contrasted it with what he called pure scramble competition. Pure scramble is themost extreme form of overcompensating density dependence, inwhich all competing individuals are so adversely affected that none
of them survive, i.e. A=0. This would be indicated in Figure 5.16
by a b value of inﬁnity (a vertical line), and Figure 5.16c is an 
example in which this is the case. More common, however, areexamples in which competition is scramble- like, i.e. there is con-
siderable but not total overcompensation ( b/H112711). This is shown,
for instance, in Figure 5.16d.
Plotting kagainst log Bis thus an informative way of 
depicting the effects of intraspeciﬁc competition on mortality.Variations in the slope of the curve ( b) give a clear indication 
•• ••08
4(a)
L
060
Carrot density (plants pot–1)1Dry weight (g pot–1)
41 6 6 430(d)
L
1 41 6 6 4M
1 41 6 6 4H060
30(c)
L M H060
30(b)
L M H
Figure 5.13 The relationship between
yield per pot and sowing density in carrots
(Dacaus carrota ) at four harvests ((a) 29 days
after sowing, (b) 62 days, (c) 76 days, and(d) 90 days) and at three nutrient levels
(low, medium and high: L, M and H),given to pots weekly after the ﬁrst harvest.Points are means of three replicates, withthe exception of the lowest density (9) and the ﬁrst harvest (9). 
4, root weight, /H17033, shoot 
weight, 7, total weight. The curves were
ﬁtted in line with theoretical yield–density
relationships, the details of which areunimportant in this context. (After Li et al. , 1996.)
scramble and contestEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 143144 CHAPTER 5
•• ••100
102
Number of plants per m2103
102
101
103104Mean dry weight (mg plant–1)Jun 27
Apr 19
Mar 1
Jan 18
Figure 5.14 The ‘constant ﬁnal yield’ of plants illustrated by a line
of slope −1 when log mean weight is plotted against log density in 
the dune annual, Vulpia fasciculata . On January 18, particularly at
low densities, growth and hence mean dry weight were roughly
independent of density. But by June 27, density-dependent
reductions in growth compensated exactly for variations in density, leading to a constant yield. (After Watkinson, 1984.)010,000
Days from sowing20Genet and tiller numbers per m2
60 100 180 140Tillers
Genets3150
3151000
Figure 5.15 Intraspeciﬁc competition in plants often regulates 
the number of modules. When populations of rye grass ( Lolium
perenne ) were sown at a range of densities, the range of ﬁnal tiller
(i.e. module) densities was far narrower than that of genets. (After
Kays & Harper, 1974.)
0.32.00.5
Log10 seedling density3.00.4k for seedling mortality2.5
01.0
Log10 (larvae mg–1 yeast)0.5 0k for larval mortality0.5b = ∞(c)
03
Log10 (numbers before the
action of competition)3 0k for larval mortality2(d)
1
12b > 1b = 0b < 1(a)
1.01.5
Log10 density3.01.0k for egg and larval mortality
2.0b = 1
b < 1(b)
0.5
0
Figure 5.16 The use of kvalues for
describing patterns of density-dependent
mortality. (a) Seedling mortality in thedune annual, Androsace septentrionalis , in
Poland. (After Symonides, 1979.) (b) Egg
mortality and larval competition in thealmond moth, Ephestia cautella . (After
Benson, 1973a.) (c) Larval competition in the fruit-ﬂy, Drosophila melanogaster .
(After Bakker, 1961.) (d) Larval mortalityin the moth, Plodia interpunctella . (After
Snyman, 1949.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 144INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 145
of the manner in which density dependence changes with den-
sity. The method can also be extended to fecundity and growth.
For fecundity, it is necessary to think of Bas the ‘total num-
ber of offspring that would have been produced had there been
no intraspeciﬁc competition’, i.e. if each reproducing individual
had produced as many offspring as it would have done in a competition-free environment. Ais then the total number of 
offspring actually produced. (In practice, Bis usually estimated 
from the population experiencing the least competition – not necessarily competition-free.) For growth, Bmust be thought 
of as the total biomass, or total number of modules, that wouldhave been produced had all individuals grown as if they were ina competition-free situation. Ais then the total biomass or total
number of modules actually produced.
Figure 5.17 provides examples in which kvalues are used to
describe the effects of intraspeciﬁc competition on fecundity and
growth. The patterns are essentially similar to those in Figure 5.16.Each falls somewhere on the continuum ranging between den-sity independence and pure scramble, and their position along thatcontinuum is immediately apparent. Using kvalues, all examples
of intraspeciﬁc competition can be quantiﬁed in the same terms.With fecundity and growth, however, the terms ‘scramble’ andespecially ‘contest’ are less appropriate. It is better simply to talkin terms of exact, over- and undercompensation.
5.7 Mathematical models: introduction
The desire to formulate general rules in ecology often ﬁnds 
its expression in the construction of mathematical or graphical models. It may seem surprising that those interested in the 
natural living world should spend time reconstructing it in anartiﬁcial mathematical form; but there are several good reasons
why this should be done. The ﬁrst is that models can crystallize,or at least bring together in terms of a few parameters, theimportant, shared properties of a wealth of unique examples. Thissimply makes it easier for ecologists to think about the problemor process under consideration, by forcing us to try to extract the essentials from complex systems. Thus, a model can provide a ‘common language’ in which each unique example can beexpressed; and if each can be expressed in a common language,then their properties relative to one another, and relative perhapsto some ideal standard, will be more apparent.
These ideas are more familiar, perhaps, in other contexts.
Newton never laid hands on a perfectly frictionless body, and Boylenever saw an ideal gas – other than in their imaginations – but
Newton’s Laws of Motion and Boyle’s Law have been of immeas-urable value to us for centuries.
Perhaps more importantly, however, models can actually shed
light on the real world that they mimic. Speciﬁc examples belowwill make this apparent. Models can, as we shall see, exhibit prop-erties that the system being modeled had not previously beenknown to possess. More commonly, models make it clear howthe behavior of a population, for example, depends on the prop-erties of the individuals that comprise it. That is, models allow
us to see the likely consequences of any assumptions that we chooseto make – ‘If it were the case that only juveniles migrate, whatwould this do to the dynamics of their populations?’ – and so on.Models can do this because mathematical methods are designedprecisely to allow a set of assumptions to be followed through
•• ••
k for reduced weight
20013
1
Log10 (numbers before the action
of competition)(c)
b < 12b = 1k for reduced egg production
2011
Log10 density(b)k for reduction in gametic output
30012
2
Log10 population density(a)
b > 1
Figure 5.17 The use of kvalues for describing density-dependent reductions in fecundity and growth. (a) Fecundity in the limpet Patella
cochlear in South Africa. (After Branch, 1975.) (b) Fecundity in the cabbage root ﬂy, Eriosichia brassicae . (After Benson, 1973b.) (c) Growth 
in the shepherd’s purse plant, Capsella bursa-pastoris . (After Palmblad, 1968.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 145146 CHAPTER 5
to their natural conclusions. As a consequence, models often sug-
gest what would be the most proﬁtable experiments to carry outor observations to make – ‘Since juvenile migration rates appearto be so important, these should be measured in each of our studypopulations’.
These reasons for constructing models are also criteria by which
any model should be judged. Indeed, a model is only useful (i.e.
worth constructing) if it does perform one or more of these func-tions. Of course, in order to perform them a model must ade-quately describe real situations and real sets of data, and this ‘abilityto describe’ or ‘ability to mimic’ is itself a further criterion by whicha model can be judged. However, the crucial word is ‘adequate’.The only perfect description of the real world is the real worlditself. A model is an adequate description, ultimately, as long as
it performs a useful function.
In the present case, some simple models of intraspeciﬁc 
competition will be described. They will be built up from a veryelementary starting point, and their properties (i.e. their abilityto satisfy the criteria described above) will then be examined.Initially, a model will be constructed for a population with dis-crete breeding seasons.
5.8 A model with discrete breeding seasons
5.8.1 Basic equations
In Section 4.7 we developed a simple model for species with dis-
crete breeding seasons, in which the population size at time t, Nt,
altered in size under the inﬂuence of a fundamental net repro-ductive rate, R. This model can be summarized in two equations:
N
t+1=NtR (5.7)
and:
Nt=N0Rt. (5.8)
The model, however, describes a
population in which there is no com-
petition. Ris constant, and if R>1 ,  
the population will continue to increase in size indeﬁnitely(‘exponential growth’, shown in Figure 5.18). The ﬁrst step is there-fore to modify the equations by making the net reproductive ratesubject to intraspeciﬁc competition. This is done in Figure 5.19,which has three components.
At point A, the population size is very small ( N
tis virtually
zero). Competition is therefore negligible, and the actual net repro-
ductive rate is adequately deﬁned by an unmodiﬁed R. Thus,
Equation 5.7 is still appropriate, or, rearranging the equation:
Nt/Nt+1=1/R. (5.9)At point B, by contrast, the population size ( Nt) is very much
larger and there is a signiﬁcant amount of intraspeciﬁc competi-tion, such that the net reproductive rate has been so modiﬁed bycompetition that the population can collectively do no better thanreplace itself each generation, because ‘births’ equal ‘deaths’. In
other words, N
t+1is simply the same as Nt, and Nt/Nt+1equals 1.
The population size at which this occurs is, by deﬁnition, the 
carrying capacity, K(see Figure 5.7).
The third component of Figure 5.19
is the straight line joining point A to
point B and extending beyond it. Thisdescribes the progressive modiﬁcation of the actual net reproductiverate as population size increases; but its straightness is simply an
•• ••Nt+1 = Nt · R
Nt+1 =NtR
1 + aNt
Time ( t )0K
Nt
no competition:
exponential growthFigure 5.18 Mathematical models of population increase with
time, in populations with discrete generations: exponential 
increase (left) and sigmoidal increase (right).
Nt /Nt+1
0 K NtAB1
1/R
Figure 5.19 The simplest, straight-line way in which the inverse
of generation increase ( Nt/Nt+1) might rise with density ( Nt). For
further explanation, see text.
incorporating
competitionEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 146INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 147
assumption made for the sake of expediency, since all straight lines
are of the simple form: y=(slope) x+(intercept). In Figure 5.19,
Nt/Nt+1is measured on the y-axis, Nton the x-axis, the intercept
is 1/ Rand the slope, based on the segment between points A and
B, is (1 −1/R)/K. Thus:
(5.10)
or, rearranging:
(5.11)
For further simplicity, ( R−1)/K
may be denoted by agiving:
(5.12)
This is a model of population increase limited by intraspeciﬁc 
competition. Its essence lies in the fact that the unrealistically constant Rin Equation 5.7 has been replaced by an actual net 
reproductive rate, R/(1+aN
t), which decreases as population
size ( Nt) increases.
We, like many others, derived
Equation 5.12 as if the behavior of a pop-
ulation is jointly determined by Rand
K, the per capita rate of increase and the
population’s carrying capacity – ais then simply a particular
combination of these. An alternative point of view is that a is mean-
ingful in its own right, measuring the per capita susceptibility 
to crowding: the larger the value of a, the greater the effect of
density on the actual rate of increase in the population (Kuno,1991). Now the behavior of a population is seen as being jointlydetermined by two properties of the individuals within it – their intrinsic per capita rate of increase and their susceptibilityto crowding, Rand a. The carrying capacity of the population 
(K=(R−1)/a) is then simply an outcome of these properties. 
The great advantage of this viewpoint is that it places indi-
viduals and populations in a more realistic biological perspective.Individuals come ﬁrst: individual birth rates, death rates and susceptibilities to crowding are subject to natural selection andevolve. Populations simply follow: a population’s carrying capa-city is just one of many features that reﬂect the values these individual properties take.
The properties of the model in
Equation 5.12 may be seen in Fig-ure 5.19 (from which the model wasderived) and Figure 5.18 (which showsNNR
aNtt
t+=+11  (  ).NNR
RN
Ktt
t+=
+−1
11  
  (  ).  N
NR
KNRt
tt
+=−
⋅+
111
1    
    a hypothetical population increasing in size over time in confor-
mity with the model). The population in Figure 5.18 describesan S-shaped curve over time. As we saw earlier, this is a desir-able quality of a model of intraspeciﬁc competition. Note, how-ever, that there are many other models that would also generate
such a curve. The advantage of Equation 5.12 is its simplicity.
The behavior of the model in the vicinity of the carrying capa-
city can best be seen by reference to Figure 5.19. At populationsizes that are less than Kthe population will increase in size; at
population sizes that are greater than Kthe population size will
decline; and at Kitself the population neither increases nor
decreases. The carrying capacity is therefore a stable equilibriumfor the population, and the model exhibits the regulatory prop-erties classically characteristic of intraspeciﬁc competition.
5.8.2 What type of competition?
It is not yet clear, however, just exactly what type or range of
competition this model is able to describe. This can be exploredby tracing the relationship between kvalues and log N(as in Sec-
tion 5.6). Each generation, the potential number of individuals produced (i.e. the number that would be produced if there were
no competition) is N
tR. The actual number produced (i.e. the 
number that survive the effects of competition) is NtR/(1+aNt).
Section 5.6 established that:
k=log (number produced) −log (number surviving). (5.13)
Thus, in the present case:
k=logNtR−logNtR/(1+aNt), (5.14)
or, simplifying:
k=log(1 +aNt). (5.15)
Figure 5.20 shows a number of plots of kagainst log10Ntwith
a variety of values of ainserted into the model. In every case,
the slope of the graph approaches and then attains a value of 1.
In other words, the density dependence always begins by under-compensating and then compensates perfectly at higher values of
N
t. The model is therefore limited in the type of competition that
it can produce, and all we have been able to say so far is that this
type of competition leads to very tightly controlled regulation of
populations.
5.8.3 Time lags
One simple modiﬁcation that we can make is to relax the
assumption that populations respond instantaneously to changes
•• ••a simple model 
of intraspeciﬁccompetition
which comes ﬁrst – aor K?
properties of thesimplest modelEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 147••148 CHAPTER 5
in their own density, i.e. that present density determines the amount
of resource available to a population and this in turn determinesthe net reproductive rate within the population. Suppose insteadthat the amount of resource available is determined by the density one time interval previously. To take a speciﬁc example,
the amount of grass in a ﬁeld in spring (the resource available to cattle) might be determined by the level of grazing (andhence, the density of cattle) in the previous year. In such a case,the reproductive rate itself will be dependent on the density onetime interval ago. Thus, since in Equations 5.7 and 5.12:
N
t+1= Nt×reproductive rate, (5.16)
Equation 5.12 may be modiﬁed to:
(5.17)
There is a time lag in the population’s
response to its own density, caused by a time lag in the response of itsresources. The behavior of the modiﬁedmodel is as follows:
R<1.33: direct approach to a stable equilibrium
R>1.33: damped oscillations towards that equilibrium.
In comparison, the original Equation 5.12, without a time lag, gave
rise to a direct approach to its equilibrium for all values of R. TheNNR
aNtt
t+
−=+1
1 1    .time lag has provoked the ﬂuctuations in the model, and it 
can be assumed to have similar, destabilizing effects on real populations.
5.8.4 Incorporating a range of competition
A simple modiﬁcation of Equation 5.12 of far more generalimportance was originally suggested by Maynard Smith andSlatkin (1973) and was discussed in detail by Bellows (1981). Italters the equation to:
(5.18)
The justiﬁcation for this modiﬁcation may be seen by examin-
ing some of the properties of the revised model. For example,Figure 5.21 shows plots of k against log N
t, analogous to those in
Figure 5.20: kis now log10[1+(aNt)b]. The slope of the curve, instead
of approaching 1 as it did previously, now approaches the value
taken by bin Equation 5.18. Thus, by the choice of appropriate
values, the model can portray undercompensation ( b<1), perfect
compensation ( b=1), scramble-like overcompensation ( b>1) or
even density independence ( b=0). This model has the gener-
ality that Equation 5.12 lacks, with the value of bdetermining the
type of density dependence that is being incorporated.
Another desirable quality that
Equation 5.18 shares with other good
models is an ability to throw freshlight on the real world. By sensibleanalysis of the population dynamics generated by the equation,NNR
aNtt
tb+=+11    ().
••k = log10 (1 + aNt)
3.5 2.0 0.5 03.5
1.0
Log10 Nt3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
1.5 2.5 3.0a = 0.5
N0 = 5
a = 0.1
N0 = 3a = 0.05
N0 = 10Final
slope = 1
Figure 5.20 The intraspeciﬁc competition inherent in 
Equation 5.13. The ﬁnal slope of kagainst log10Ntis unity 
(exact compensation), irrespective of the starting density N0
or the constant a (= (R−1)/K).
k = log10 (1 + (aNt)b)
6 300479
2
Log 10 Nt458
6
5
3
12
1N0 = 10
a = 0.1
b = 5
N0 = 10
a = 0.1
b = 2
N0 = 10
a = 0.1
b = 0.5
Figure 5.21 The intraspeciﬁc competition inherent in Equation 5.19.
The ﬁnal slope is equal to the value of bin the equation.
time lags provoke
populationﬂuctuations
the dynamic pattern?it’s Rand bEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 148••INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 149
••1000 10001125
10
R(a)
34
b
Monotonic
dampingDamped
oscillationsStable limit
cyclesChaos
Population size
Time(b)
Monotonic dampingDamped oscillationsStable limit cyclesChaos
Figure 5.22 (a) The range of population ﬂuctuations (themselves shown in (b)) generated by Equation 5.19 with various combinations of
band Rinserted. (After May, 1975a; Bellows, 1981.)
it is possible to draw guarded conclusions about the dynamics of
natural populations. The mathematical method by which this andsimilar equations may be examined is set out and discussed byMay (1975a), but the results of the analysis (Figure 5.22) can beappreciated without dwelling on the analysis itself. Figure 5.22b
shows the various patterns of population growth and dynamicsthat Equation 5.18 can generate. Figure 5.22a sets out the condi-tions under which each of these patterns occurs. Note ﬁrst thatthe pattern of dynamics depends on two things: (i) b, the precise
type of competition or density dependence; and (ii) R, the effect-
ive net reproductive rate (taking density-independent mortalityinto account). By contrast, a determines not the type of pattern,
but only the level about which any ﬂuctuations occur.
As Figure 5.22a shows, low values of band/or Rlead to popu-
lations that approach their equilibrium size without ﬂuctuating
at all (‘monotonic damping’). This has already been hinted at inFigure 5.18. There, a population behaving in conformity withEquation 5.12 approached equilibrium directly, irrespective of thevalue of R. Equation 5.12 is a special case of Equation 5.18 in which
b=1 (perfect compensation); Figure 5.22a conﬁrms that for b=1,
monotonic damping is the rule whatever the effective net repro-ductive rate.
As the values of band/or Rincrease, the behavior of the popu-
lation changes ﬁrst to damped oscillations gradually approachingequilibrium, and then to ‘stable limit cycles’ in which the popu-lation ﬂuctuates around an equilibrium level, revisiting the sametwo, four or even more points time and time again. Finally, withlarge values of band R, the population ﬂuctuates in an apparently
irregular and chaotic fashion.
5.8.5 Chaos
Thus, a model built around a density-dependent, supposedly 
regulatory process (intraspeciﬁc competition) can lead to a verywide range of population dynamics. If a model population has evena moderate fundamental net reproductive rate (and the ability toleave 100 ( =R) offspring in the next generation in a competition-
free environment is not unreasonable), and if it has a density-
dependent reaction which even moderately overcompensates, then far from being stable, it may ﬂuctuate widely in numberswithout the action of any extrinsic factor. The biological signiﬁc-ance of this is the strong suggestion that even in an environmentthat is wholly constant and predictable, the intrinsic qualities of apopulation and the individuals within it may, by themselves, giverise to population dynamics with large and perhaps even chaoticﬂuctuations. The consequences of intraspeciﬁc competition are
clearly not limited to ‘tightly controlled regulation’.
This leads us to two important conclusions. First, time lags,
high reproductive rates and overcompensating density dependenceare capable (either alone or in combination) of producing all typesof ﬂuctuations in population density, without invoking anyextrinsic cause. Second, and equally important, this has beenmade apparent by the analysis of mathematical models.EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 149150 CHAPTER 5
In fact, the recognition that even
simple ecological systems may contain
the seeds of chaos has led to chaositself becoming a topic of interest
amongst ecologists (Schaffer & Kot, 1986; Hastings et al. , 1993;
Perry et al. , 2000). A detailed exposition of the nature of chaos is
not appropriate here, but a few key points should be understood.
1The term ‘chaos’ may itself be misleading if it is taken to imply
a ﬂuctuation with absolutely no discernable pattern. Chaoticdynamics do not consist of a sequence of random numbers.On the contrary, there are tests (although they are not alwayseasy to put into practice) designed to distinguish chaotic from
random and other types of ﬂuctuations.
2Fluctuations in chaotic ecological systems occur betweendeﬁnable upper and lower densities. Thus, in the model ofintraspeciﬁc competition that we have discussed, the idea of‘regulation’ has not been lost altogether, even in the chaoticregion.
3Unlike the behavior of truly regulated systems, however, twosimilar population trajectories in a chaotic system will not tendto converge on (‘be attracted to’) the same equilibrium dens-ity or the same limit cycle (both of them ‘simple’ attractors).Rather, the behavior of a chaotic system is governed by a‘strange attractor’. Initially, very similar trajectories willdiverge from one another, exponentially, over time: chaotic
systems exhibit ‘extreme sensitivity to initial conditions’.
4Hence, the long-term future behavior of a chaotic system iseffectively impossible to predict, and prediction becomesincreasingly inaccurate as one moves further into the future.Even if we appear to have seen the system in a particular statebefore – and know precisely what happened subsequently lasttime – tiny (perhaps immeasurable) initial differences will bemagniﬁed progressively, and past experience will become ofincreasingly little value.
Ecology must aim to become a predictive science. Chaotic sys-
tems set us some of the sternest challenges in prediction. There
has been an understandable interest, therefore, in the question‘How often, if ever, are ecological systems chaotic?’ Attempts toanswer this question, however, whilst illuminating, have certainlynot been deﬁnitive.
Most recent attempts to detect
chaos in ecological systems have beenbased on a mathematical advanceknown as Takens’ theorem . This says, 
in the context of ecology, that even
when a system comprises a number of interacting elements, itscharacteristics (whether it is chaotic, etc.) may be deduced froma time series of abundances of just one of those elements (e.g.one species). This is called ‘reconstructing the attractor’. To be
more speciﬁc: suppose, for example, that a system’s behavior isdetermined by interactions between four elements (for simpli-
city, four species). First, one expresses the abundance of just oneof those species at time t, N
t, as a function of the sequence of 
abundances at four successive previous time points: Nt−1, Nt−2, 
Nt−3, Nt−4 (the same number of ‘lags’ as there are elements in 
the original system). Then, the attractor of this lagged system ofabundances is an accurate reconstruction of the attractor of the original system, which determines its characteristics.
In practice, this means taking a series of abundances of, say,
one species and ﬁnding the ‘best’ model, in statistical terms, for
predicting N
tas a function of lagged abundances, and then invest-
igating this reconstructed attractor as a means of investigating 
the nature of the dynamics of the underlying system. Unfortun-ately, ecological time series (compared, say, to those of physics)are particularly short and particularly noisy. Thus, methods for
identifying a ‘best’ model and applying Takens’ theorem, and foridentifying chaos in ecology generally, have been ‘the focus ofcontinuous methodological debate and reﬁnement’ (Bjørnstad &Grenfell, 2001), one consequence of which is that any suggestionof a suitable method in a textbook such as this is almost certainlydoomed to be outmoded by the time it is ﬁrst read.
Notwithstanding these technical difﬁculties, however, and in
spite of occasional demonstrations of apparent chaos in artiﬁciallaboratory environments (Costantino et al., 1997), a consensus view
has grown that chaos is not a dominant pattern of dynamics 
in natural ecological systems. One trend, therefore, has been toseek to understand why chaos might notoccur in nature, despite
its being generated readily by ecological models. For example,Fussmann and Heber (2002) examined model populationsembedded in food webs and found that as the webs took on moreof the characteristics observed in nature (see Chapter 20) chaosbecame less likely.
Thus, the potential importance of
chaos in ecological systems is clear.From a fundamental point of view, weneed to appreciate that if we have a relatively simple system, it may nevertheless generate complex, chaotic dynamics; and 
that if we observe complex dynamics, the underlying explanationmay nevertheless be simple. From an applied point of view, if ecology is to become a predictive and manipulative science, then we need to know the extent to which long-term predictionis threatened by one of the hallmarks of chaos – extreme sensit-ivity to initial conditions. The key practical question, however – ‘how common is chaos?’ – remains largely unanswered.
5.9 Continuous breeding: the logistic equation
The model derived and discussed in Section 5.8 was appropriate
for populations that have discrete breeding seasons and cantherefore be described by equations growing in discrete steps, i.e. by ‘difference’ equations. Such models are not appropriate,
•• ••key characteristics of
chaotic dynamics
Takens’ theorem:reconstructing theattractorhow common – orimportant – is chaos?EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 150INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 151
however, for those populations in which birth and death are 
continuous. These are best described by models of continuousgrowth, or ‘differential’ equations, which will be considered next.
The net rate of increase of such a
population will be denoted by d N/dt
(referred to in speech as ‘d Nby d t’). This
represents the ‘speed’ at which a popu-
lation increases in size, N, as time, t, progresses. The increase 
in size of the whole population is the sum of the contributions
of the various individuals within it. Thus, the average rate ofincrease per individual, or the ‘per capita rate of increase’ isgiven by d N/dt(1/N). But we have already seen in Section 4.7 
that in the absence of competition, this is the deﬁnition of the‘intrinsic rate of natural increase’, r. Thus:
(5.19)
and:
(5.20)
A population increasing in size under the inﬂuence of Equa-
tion 5.20, with r>0, is shown in Figure 5.23. Not surprisingly,
there is unlimited, ‘exponential’ increase. In fact, Equation 5.20 is
the continuous form of the exponential difference Equation 5.8,and as discussed in Section 4.7, ris simply log
eR. (Mathematic-
ally adept readers will see that Equation 5.20 can be obtained by
differentiating Equation 5.8.) Rand rare clearly measures of the
same commodity: ‘birth plus survival’ or ‘birth minus death’; thedifference between Rand ris merely a change of currency.
For the sake of realism, intraspeciﬁc
competition must obviously be added
to Equation 5.20. This can be achievedmost simply by a method exactly equivalent to the one used inFigure 5.19, giving rise to:
(5.21)
This is known as the logistic equation (coined by Verhulst, 1838),
and a population increasing in size under its inﬂuence is shownin Figure 5.23.
The logistic equation is the continuous equivalent of Equa-
tion 5.12, and it therefore has all the essential characteristics of Equation 5.12, and all of its shortcomings. It describes a sigmoidal growth curve approaching a stable carrying capacity,but it is only one of many reasonable equations that do this. Its major advantage is its simplicity. Moreover, whilst it was possible to incorporate a range of competitive intensities into  d
dN
trNKN
K    . =−⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟  d
dN
trN  .=  d
dN
tNr1⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟=  
Equation 5.12, this is by no means easy with the logistic equa-
tion. The logistic is therefore doomed to be a model of per-fectly compensating density dependence. Nevertheless, in spite of these limitations, the equation will be an integral componentof models in Chapters 8 and 10, and it has played a central role
in the development of ecology.
5.10 Individual differences: asymmetric
competition
5.10.1 Size inequalities
Until now, we have focused on what happens to the whole 
population or the average individual within it. Different indi-viduals, however, may respond to intraspeciﬁc competition in verydifferent ways. Figure 5.24 shows the results of an experiment in which ﬂax ( Linum usitatissimum ) was sown at three densities,
and harvested at three stages of development, recording the
weight of each plant individually. This made it possible to monitor the effects of increasing amounts of competition not onlyas a result of variations in sowing density, but also as a result ofplant growth (between the ﬁrst and the last harvests). Whenintraspeciﬁc competition was at its least intense (at the lowest sowing density after only 2 weeks’ growth) the individual plantweights were distributed symmetrically about the mean. Whencompetition was at its most intense, however, the distribution 
was strongly skewed to the left: there were many very small individuals and a few large ones. As the intensity of competitiongradually increased, the degree of skewness increased as well.Decreased size – but increased skewness in size – is also seen to
•• ••Time ( t)0NKdN
dt= rN
dN
dt= rN(K–N)
K
Figure 5.23 Exponential ( ) and sigmoidal ( ) 
increase in density ( N) with time for models of continuous
breeding. The equation giving sigmoidal increase is the 
logistic equation.r, the intrinsic rate of
natural increase
the logistic equationEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 151152 CHAPTER 5
be associated with increased density (and presumably competi-
tion) in cod ( Gadus morhua ) living off the coast of Norway
(Figure 5.25).
More generally, we may also say
that increased competition increased
the degree of size inequality within the population, i.e. the extent to which
total biomass was unevenly distributed amongst the different individuals (Weiner, 1990). Rather similar results have beenobtained from a number of other populations of animals(Uchmanski, 1985) and plants (Uchmanski, 1985; Weiner &Thomas, 1986). Typically, populations experiencing the mostintense competition have the greatest size inequality and oftenhave a size distribution in which there are many small and a few
large individuals. Characterizing a population by an arbitrary‘average’ individual can obviously be very misleading under suchcircumstances, and can divert attention from the fact that intra-speciﬁc competition is a force affecting individuals, even thoughits effects may often be detected in whole populations.5.10.2 Preempting resources
An indication of the way in which competition can exaggerate
underlying inequalities in a population comes from observationson a natural, crowded population of the woodland annualImpatiens pallida in southeastern Pennsylvania. Over an 8-week
period, growth was very much faster in large than in small plants
– in fact, small plants did not grow at all (Figure 5.26a). Thisincreased signiﬁcantly the size inequality within the population(Figure 5.26b). Thus, the smaller a plant was initially, the moreit was affected by neighbors. Plants that established early preemptedor ‘captured’ space, and subsequently were little affected byintraspeciﬁc competition. Plants that emerged later entered auniverse in which most of the available space had already beenpreempted; they were therefore greatly affected by intraspeciﬁccompetition. Competition was asymmetric: there was a hier-
archy. Some individuals were affected far more than others, andsmall initial differences were transformed by competition into muchlarger differences 8 weeks later.
•• ••First harvest
(2 weeks fromemergence)
4
Plant weight (mg)10 16 28 40Medium density
1440 m–2
410 16 28 40High density
3600 m–2
04203040
10
10 16 28 40Low density
60 m–2
Second harvest
(6 weeks fromemergence)
0203040
10
80
160240 400
320Number of plants
Plant weight (mg)80
160240 80
160240
Final harvest
(maturity)
0203040
10
0.8 1.6 2.4 3.2 0.8 1.6 2.4
Plant weight (g)0.8 1.6 2.4Figure 5.24 Competition and a skewed
distribution of plant weights. Frequency
distributions of individual plant weights inpopulations of ﬂax ( Linum usitatissimum ),
sown at three densities and harvested at
three ages. The black bar is the meanweight. (After Obeid et al. , 1967.)
the inadequacy of
the averageEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 152INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 153
If competition is asymmetric because superior competitors 
preempt resources, then competition is most likely to be asym-
metric when it occurs for resources that are most liable to be preempted. Speciﬁcally, competition amongst plants for light, inwhich a superior competitor can overtop and shade an inferior,
might be expected to lend itself far more readily to preemptiveresource capture than competition for soil nutrients or water, wherethe roots of even a very inferior competitor will have moreimmediate access to at least some of the available resources than
•• ••1.0
0.0
–1.5
1960 1970 1980 1990SD(a)
2
0
–2
1960 1970 1980 1990SD(b)
–11
YearSkewness
Density
SkewnessDensityFigure 5.25 (right) Values of skewness (in the frequency
distribution of lengths) and density (a) and of skewness and mean
length (b) are expressed as standard deviations from mean valuesfor the years 1957–94 for cod ( Gadus morhua ) from the Skagerrak,
off the coast of Norway. Despite marked ﬂuctuations from year to
year, much of it the result of variations in weather, skewness wasclearly greatest at high densities ( r=0.58, P< 0.01) when lengths
were smallest ( r=−0.45, P< 0.05), that is, when competition was
most intense. (After Lekve et al. , 2002.)
Mass (g)Number
20 15 500102050
10(b)
3040Beginning
20 15 500102050
103040End
Change in mass (g)
6 5 30
051015
4
Mass (g)2 1Number
0510(a)
Plants
that died
Figure 5.26 Asymmetric competition in 
a natural population of Impatiens pallida . 
(a) The increase in mass of survivors of
different sizes over an 8-week period, andthe distribution of initial sizes of those
individuals that died over the same period.The horizontal axis is the same in eachcase. (b) The distribution of individualweights at the beginning (Gini coefﬁcient, a measure of inequality, 0.39) and the endof this period (Gini coefﬁcient, 0.48). (After Thomas & Weiner, 1989.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 153154 CHAPTER 5
the roots of its superiors. This expectation is borne out by the
results of an experiment in which morning glory vines ( Ipomoea
tricolor ) were grown as single plants in pots (‘no competition’),
as several plants rooted in their own pots but with their stemsintertwined on a single stake (‘shoots competing’), as several plants
rooted in the same pot, but with their stems growing up theirown stakes (‘roots competing’) and as several plants rooted in thesame pot with their stems intertwined on one stake (‘shoots androots competing’) (Figure 5.27). Despite the fact that root com-petition was more intense than shoot competition, in the sensethat it led to a far greater decrease in the mean weight of indi-vidual plants, it was shoot competition for light that led to a muchgreater increase in size inequality.
Skewed distributions are one pos-
sible manifestation of hierarchical, asym-
metric competition, but there are manyothers. For instance, Ziemba and
Collins (1999) studied competition amongst larval salamanders(Ambystoma tigrinum nebulosum ) that were either isolated or grouped
together with competitors. The size of the largest surviving larvaewas unaffected by competition ( P=0.42) but the smallest larvae
were much smaller ( P< 0.0001). This emphasizes that intra-
speciﬁc competition is not only capable of exaggerating individualdifferences, it is also greatly affected by individual differences.
Asymmetric competition was observed on a much longer
timescale in a population of the herbaceous perennial Anemone
hepatica in Sweden (Figure 5.28) (Tamm, 1956). Despite the
crops of seedlings that entered the population between 1943 and
1952, it is quite clear that the most important factor determiningwhich individuals survived to 1956 was whether or not theywere established in 1943. Of the 30 individuals that had reachedlarge or intermediate size by 1943, 28 survived until 1956, and
some of these had branched. By contrast, of the 112 plants thatwere either small in 1943 or appeared as seedlings subsequently,only 26 survived to 1956, and not one of these was sufﬁcientlywell established to have ﬂowered. Similar patterns can be
observed in tree populations. The survival rates, the birth ratesand thus the ﬁtnesses of the few established adults are high; thoseof the many seedlings and saplings are comparatively low.
These considerations illustrate a ﬁnal,
important general point: asymmetriestend to reinforce the regulatory powersof intraspeciﬁc competition. Tamm’sestablished plants were successful competitors year after year, buthis small plants and seedlings were repeatedly unsuccessful. This
guaranteed a near constancy in the number of established plantsbetween 1943 and 1956. Each year there was a near-constant num-ber of ‘winners’, accompanied by a variable number of ‘losers’that not only failed to grow, but usually, in due course, died.
5.11 Territoriality
Territoriality is one particularly important and widespread phe-
nomenon that results in asymmetric intraspeciﬁc competition. Itoccurs when there is active interference between individuals,such that a more or less exclusive area, the territory, is defendedagainst intruders by a recognizable pattern of behavior.
Individuals of a territorial species
that fail to obtain a territory often
make no contribution whatsoever tofuture generations. Territoriality, then,
•• ••Figure 5.27 When morning glory vines
competed, root competition was most
effective in reducing mean plant weight(treatments signiﬁcantly different, P< 0.01,
for all comparisons except (c) with (d)), 
but shoot competition was most effectivein increasing the degree of size inequality,as measured by the coefﬁcient of variationin weight (signiﬁcant differences betweentreatments (a) and (b), P< 0.05, and (a) 
and (d), P< 0.01). (After Weiner, 1986.)Mean weight (g) (    )
1(a) No
competition467
35
2
Coefficient of variation in weight (%) (    )12182226
1620
1424
(b) Shoots
competing(c) Rootscompeting(d) Shoots androots competing
skews and other
hierarchiesasymmetry enhancesregulation
territoriality is acontestEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 154INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 155
is a ‘contest’. There are winners (those that come to hold a 
territory) and losers (those that do not), and at any one time therecan be only a limited number of winners. The exact number of territories (winners) is usually somewhat indeterminate in any one year, and certainly varies from year to year, depending
on environmental conditions. Nevertheless, the contest nature of territoriality ensures, like asymmetric competition generally,a comparative constancy in the number of surviving, reproduc-ing individuals. One important consequence of territoriality,therefore, is population regulation, or more particularly, the reg-ulation of the number of territory holders. Thus, when territoryowners die, or are experimentally removed, their places are oftenrapidly taken by newcomers. For instance, in great tit ( Parus major )
populations, vacated woodland territories are reoccupied by
birds coming from hedgerows where reproductive success isnoticeably lower (Krebs, 1971).
Some have felt that the regulatory consequences of territori-
ality must themselves be the root cause underlying the evolutionof territorial behavior – territoriality being favored because thepopulation as a whole beneﬁtted from the rationing effects,which guaranteed that the population did not overexploit itsresources (e.g. Wynne-Edwards, 1962). However, there are pow-erful and fundamental reasons for rejecting this ‘group selectionist’explanation (essentially, it stretches evolutionary theory beyondreasonable limits): the ultimate cause of territoriality must be soughtwithin the realms of natural selection, in some advantage accru-ing to the individual.
Any beneﬁt that an individual 
does gain from territoriality, of course,
must be set against the costs of defend-ing the territory. In some animals this
defense involves ﬁerce combat between competitors, whilst in others there is a more subtle mutual recognition by competitors
of one another’s keep-out signals (e.g. song or scent). Yet, evenwhen the chances of physical injury are minimal, territorial animals typically expend energy in patrolling and advertizingtheir territories, and these energetic costs must be exceeded by
any beneﬁts if territoriality is to be favored by natural selection(Davies & Houston, 1984; Adams, 2001).
Praw and Grant (1999), for example, investigated the costs 
and beneﬁts to convict cichlid ﬁsh ( Archocentrus nigrofasciatus ) of
defending food patches of different sizes. As patch size increased,the amount of food eaten by a patch defender increased (the beneﬁt;Figure 5.29a), but the frequency of chasing intruders (the cost;Figure 5.29b) also increased. Evolution should favor an inter-mediate patch (territory) size at which the trade-off between costs
and beneﬁts is optimized, and indeed, the growth rate of defenderswas greatest in intermediate-sized patches (Figure 5.29c).
On the other hand, explaining territoriality only in terms of a
net beneﬁt to the territory owner is rather like history always beingwritten by the victors. There is another, possibly trickier ques-tion, which seems not to have been answered – could those indi-viduals without a territory not do better by challenging theterritory owners more often and with greater determination?
Of course, describing territoriality
in terms of just ‘winners’ and ‘losers’ isan oversimpliﬁcation. Generally, thereare ﬁrst, second and a range of conso-lation prizes – not all territories are equally valuable. This has been
demonstrated in an unusually striking way in a study of oyster-catchers ( Haematopus ostralegus ) on the Dutch coast, where pairs
of birds defend both nesting territories on the salt marsh and feed-ing territories on the mudﬂats (Ens et al. , 1992). For some birds
(the ‘residents’), the feeding territory is simply an extension of the
•• ••Figure 5.28 Space preemption in a
perennial, Anemone hepatica , in a Swedish
forest. Each line represents one individual:
straight for unramiﬁed ones, branchedwhere the plant has ramiﬁed, bold where
the plant ﬂowered and broken where theplant was not seen that year. Group Awere alive and large in 1943, group B aliveand small in 1943, group C appeared ﬁrstin 1944, group D in 1945 and group Ethereafter, presumably from seedlings.(After Tamm, 1956.)
19431956
194419451946194719481949195019511952195319541955
0
A30 10 20 0
E605040302010 0
D30 10 20 0
C10 0
B10
beneﬁts and costs of
territorialitynot simply winnersand losersEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 155•• ••156 CHAPTER 5
nesting territory: they form one spatial unit. For other pairs, 
however (the ‘leapfrogs’), the nesting territory is further inlandand hence separated spatially from the feeding territory (Fig-ure 5.30a). Residents ﬂedge many more offspring than do leapfrogs(Figure 5.30b), because they deliver far more food to them
(Figure 5.30c). From an early age, resident chicks follow their parents onto the mudﬂats, taking each prey item as soon as it iscaptured. Leapfrog chicks, however, are imprisoned on theirnesting territory prior to ﬂedging; all their food has to be ﬂownin. It is far better to have a resident than a leapfrog territory.
5.12 Self-thinning
We have seen throughout this chapter that intraspeciﬁc competi-
tion can inﬂuence the number of deaths, the number of birthsand the amount of growth within a population. We have illus-trated this largely by looking at the end results of competition.But in practice, the effects are often progressive. As a cohort ages,
the individuals grow in size, their requirements increase andthey therefore compete at a greater and greater intensity. This inturn tends gradually to increase their risk of dying. But if someindividuals die, then the density and the intensity of competitionare decreased – which affects growth, which affects competition,which affects survival, which affects density, and so on.
5.12.1 Dynamic thinning lines
The patterns that emerge in growing, crowded cohorts of indi-
viduals were originally the focus of particular attention in plantpopulations. For example, perennial rye grass ( Lolium perenne ) was
sown at a range of densities, and samples from each density wereharvested after 14, 35, 76, 104 and 146 days (Figure 5.31a). Fig-
ure 5.31a has the same logarithmic axes – density and mean plantweight – as Figure 5.14. It is most important to appreciate thedifference between the two. In Figure 5.14, each line representeda separate yield–density relationship at different ages of a cohort.Successive points along a line represent different initial sowingdensities. In Figure 5.31, each line itself represents a different sowing density, and successive points along a line represent populations of this initial sowing density at different ages. Thelines are therefore trajectories that follow a cohort through 
time. This is indicated by arrows, pointing from many small, youngindividuals (bottom right) to fewer, larger, older individuals (top left).
Mean plant weight (at a given age) was always greatest in the
lowest density populations (Figure 5.31a). It is also clear that the highest density populations were the ﬁrst to suffer substantialmortality. What is most noticeable, however, is that eventually,in all cohorts, density declined and mean plant weight increasedin unison: populations progressed along roughly the same straightWeight of pellets eaten (z-score)
11 7 3–1.51–1–0.51
5
Patch diameter (cells)(a)
900.5Chase rate (no. min–1)
11 7 3 125
5
Patch diameter (cells)(b)
934Defender growth rate (z-score, %)
11 7 3 1–11.5
5
Patch diameter (cells)(c)
90.51
0
–0.5
–1.5
Figure 5.29 Optimal territory size in the convict cichlid ﬁsh,
Archocentrus nigrofasciatus . (a) As patch (territory) size increased,
the amount of food eaten by a territory defender (standardized z
score) increased but leveled off at the largest sizes (solid line, linear
regression: r2=0.27, P=0.002; dashed line, quadratic regression: 
r2=0.33, P=0.003). (b) As patch (territory) size increased, the
chase rate of territory defenders increased (linear regression: r
2=0.68, P< 0.0001). (c) As patch (territory) size increased, the
growth rate of territory defenders (standardized zscore) was
highest at intermediate-sized territories (quadratic regression: r
2=0.22, P=0.028). (After Praw & Grant, 1999.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 156•• ••INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 157
500 100 mFledglings per pair
June May0.001.033
Date completion first clutch0.8
0.6
0.4
0.250
42
313947
299
7
25(b)
Food delivered (g AFDW)
2000 10000012
Time in flight (s)10
8
6
4
165
7(c)
3000 4000274
162
68(a)
line. The populations are said to have experienced self-thinning
(i.e. a progressive decline in density in a population of grow-
ing individuals), and the line that they approached and then followed is known as a dynamic thinning line (Weller, 1990).
The lower the sowing density, the later was the onset of self-
thinning. In all cases, though, the populations initially followed
a trajectory that was almost vertical, i.e. there was little mortal-ity. Then, as they neared the thinning line, the populations suf-fered increasing amounts of mortality, so that the slopes of allthe self-thinning trajectories gradually approached the dynamicthinning line and then progressed along it. Note also that Fig-ure 5.31 has been drawn, following convention, with log densityon the x-axis and log mean weight on the y-axis. This is not 
meant to imply that density is the independent variable onwhich mean weight depends. Indeed, it can be argued that mean
weight increases naturally during plant growth, and this deter-mines the decrease in density. The most satisfactory view is thatdensity and mean weight are wholly interdependent.
Plant populations (if sown at sufﬁci-
ently high densities) have repeatedly
been found to approach and then followa dynamic thinning line. For many years, all such lines were widelyperceived as having a slope of roughly −3/2, and the relationship
was often referred to as the ‘ −3/2 power law’ (Yoda et al. , 1963;
Hutchings, 1983), since density ( N) was seen as related to mean
weight ( P) by the equation:
logP=log c −3/2 log N (5.22)Figure 5.30 (a) A coastal area in the
Netherlands providing both nesting and
feeding territories for oystercatchers. In‘resident’ territories (dark shading), nestingand feeding areas are adjacent and chicks
can be taken from one to the other at anearly age. ‘Leapfrogs’, however, haveseparate nesting and feeding territories(light shading) and food has to be ﬂown in until the chicks ﬂedge. (b) Residents (
/H17033)
ﬂedge more chicks than leapfrogs ( /H17033). 
(c) Residents ( /H17033) deliver more food per 
tide (grams of ash-free dry weight (g
AFDW), with standard deviations) thanleapfrogs (
/H17033). The latter deliver more, 
the more effort (in ﬂying) they expend, but still cannot match the residents. (After Ens et al. , 1992.)
the –3/2 power lawEIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 157158 CHAPTER 5
or:
P=c N−3/2(5.23)
where c is constant.
Note, however, that there are statistical problems in using
Equations 5.22 and 5.23 to estimate the slope of the relationship
(Weller, 1987). In particular, since Pis usually estimated as B/N,
where Bis the total biomass per unit area, Pand Nare inevitably
correlated, and any relationship between them is, to a degree, spurious. It is therefore preferable to use the equivalent relation-ships, lacking autocorrelation:
logB=log c −1/2 l o g N (5.24)
or:
B=c N
−1/2. (5.25)
5.12.2 Species and population boundary lines
In fact, in many cases where biomass–density relationships have
been documented, it is not a single cohort that has been followedover time, but a series of crowded populations at different dens-ities (and possibly different ages) that have been compared. In suchcases, it is more correct to speak of a species boundary line – a line
beyond which combinations of density and mean weight appear
not to be possible for that species (Weller, 1990). Indeed, sincewhat is possible for a species will vary with the environment inwhich it is living, the species boundary line will itself subsume a
whole series of population boundary lines, each of which deﬁnes
the limits of a particular population of that species in a particularenvironment (Sackville Hamilton et al. , 1995).
Thus, a self-thinning population
should approach and then track itspopulation boundary line, which, as atrajectory, we would call its dynamicthinning line – but this need not also beits species boundary line. For example,
the light regime, soil fertility, spatial arrangement of seedlings,and no doubt other factors may all alter the boundary line (andhence the dynamic thinning line) for a particular population(Weller, 1990; Sackville Hamilton et al. , 1995). Soil fertility, for
example, has been found in different studies to alter the slope ofthe thinning line, the intercept, neither, or both (Morris, 2002).
The inﬂuence of light is also worth
considering in more detail, since ithighlights a key feature of thinning
and boundary lines. A slope of roughly −3/ 2 means that mean 
plant weight is increasing faster than density is decreasing, andhence that total biomass is increasing (a slope of −1/2 on a total
biomass–density graph). But eventually this must stop: totalbiomass cannot increase indeﬁnitely. Instead, the thinning line mightbe expected to change to a slope of −1: that is, loss through 
mortality is exactly balanced by the growth of survivors, such thatthe total biomass remains constant (a horizontal line on a total
biomass–density graph). This can be seen when populations ofLolium perenne (Figure 5.31b) were grown at low light intensities.
A boundary (and thinning line) with a slope of −1 was apparent
•• ••100
10–1
10–2
103104105Slope –3/2100
10–1
10–2
103104105Slope –1(a)Total shoot dry weight per plant (g)
Density of survivors (m–2)(b)
Figure 5.31 Self-thinning in Lolium perenne
sown at ﬁve densities: 1000 ( /H17033), 5000 ( /H17033),
10,000 ( /H17039), 50,000 ( /H17039) and 100,000 ( /H17009)
‘seeds’ m−2, in: (a) 0% shade and (b) 83%
shade. The lines join populations of the
ﬁve sowing densities harvested on ﬁve successive occasions. They thereforeindicate the trajectories, over time, that
these populations would have followed.The arrows indicate the directions of the trajectories, i.e. the direction of self-thinning. For further discussion, see text.(After Lonsdale & Watkinson, 1983.)
dynamic thinning
and boundary linesneed not be thesame
thinning slopes of −1EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 158INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 159
at much lower densities than it would otherwise be. Clearly, the
light regime can alter the population boundary line. This alsoemphasizes, however, that boundary lines with negative slopessteeper than −1 (whether or not they are exactly −3/ 2) imply 
limits to the allowable combinations of plant densities and mean
weights that set in before the maximum biomass from an area of
land has been reached. Possible reasons are discussed below.
5.12.3 A single boundary line for all species?
Intriguingly, when the thinning and boundary lines of all sorts of
plants are plotted on the same ﬁgure, they all appear to have approx-imately the same slope and also to have intercepts (i.e. values ofc in Equation 5.24) falling within a narrow range (Figure 5.32).To the lower right of the ﬁgure are high-density populations of
small plants (annual herbs and perennials with short-livedshoots), whilst to the upper left are sparse populations of verylarge plants, including coastal redwoods ( Sequoia sempervirens ), 
the tallest known trees. Fashions change in science as in every-thing else. At one time, ecologists looked at Figure 5.32 and sawuniformity – all plants marching in −3/2 time (e.g. White, 1980),
with variations from the norm seen as either ‘noise’ or as onlyof minor interest. Subsequently, serious doubt was cast on theconformity of individual slopes to −3/2, and on the whole idea
of a single, ideal thinning line (Weller, 1987, 1990; Zeide, 1987;
Lonsdale, 1990). There really is no contradiction, though. On theone hand, the lines in Figure 5.32 occupy a very much smallerportion of the graph than one would expect by chance alone. Thereisapparently some fundamental phenomenon linking this whole
spectrum of plant types: not an invariable ‘rule’ but an under-lying trend. On the other hand, the variations between the linesare real and important and in as much need of explanation as the
general trend.
5.12.4 A geometric basis for self-thinning
We proceed, therefore, by examining possible bases for the gen-
eral trend, and then enquiring why different species or popula-tions might display their own variations on this common theme.Two broad types of explanation for the trend have been proposed.The ﬁrst (and for many years the only one) is geometric; the sec-
ond is based on resource allocation in plants of different sizes.
The geometric argument runs as follows. In a growing cohort
of plants, as the mass of the population increases, the leaf areaindex ( L, the leaf area per unit area of land) does not keep on increas-
ing. Instead, beyond a certain point, it remains constant irrespectiveof plant density ( N). It is, in fact, precisely beyond this point 
that the population follows the dynamic thinning line. We canexpress this by writing:
L=λN=constant (5.26)
where λis the mean leaf area per surviving plant. However, 
the leaf area of individual plants increases as they grow, and so
too therefore does their mean, λ. It is reasonable to expect λ,
because it is an area, to be related to linear measurements of a plant,such as stem diameter, D, by a formula of the following type:
λ=aD
2(5.27)
where a is a constant. Similarly, it is reasonable to expect mean
plant weight, P, to be related to Dby:
P=bD3(5.28)
where b is also a constant. Putting Equations 5.26–5.28 together,we obtain:
•• ••
Mean dry weight per plant (g)
10110
Number of plants per m210–210–11 10210310410510–210–1102103104105106107
31
3029
27
2825
26
2024
23
22
2119
1817 16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9Time
78
65
4
3
2
1
Figure 5.32 Self-thinning in a wide variety of herbs and trees.
Each line is a different species, and the line itself indicates the
range over which observations were made. The arrows, drawn on representative lines only, indicate the direction of self-thinningover time. The ﬁgure is based on Figure 2.9 of White (1980),
which also gives the original sources and the species names for the 31 data sets.EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 159160 CHAPTER 5
P=b(L/a)3/2·N−3/2(5.29)
This is structurally equivalent to the −3/ 2 power law in Equa-
tion 5.23, with the intercept constant, c, given by b( L/a)3/2.
It is apparent, therefore, why thinning lines might generally
be expected to have slopes of approximately −3/2. Moreover, if
the relationships in Equations 5.27 and 5.28 were roughly the same
for all plant species, and if all plants supported roughly the same
leaf area per unit area of ground ( L), then the constant c would
be approximately the same for all species. On the other hand, suppose that Lis not quite constant for some species (see Equa-
tion 5.26), or that the powers in Equations 5.27 and 5.28 are notexactly 2 or 3, or that the constants in these equations (a and b)either vary between species or are not actually constants at all.Thinning lines will then have slopes that depart from −3/ 2, and
slopes and intercepts that vary from species to species. It is easyto see why, according to the geometric argument, there is a broad
similarity in the behavior of different species, but also why, oncloser examination, there are variations between species and nosuch thing as a single, ‘ideal’ thinning line.
Furthermore, contrary to the simple
geometric argument, the yield–densityrelationship in a growing cohort neednot depend only on the numbers that
die and the way the survivors grow. We have seen (see Section5.10) that competition is frequently highly asymmetric. If thosethat die in a cohort are predominantly the very smallest indi-
viduals, then density (individuals per unit area) will decline more rapidly as the cohort grows than it would otherwise do, and the slope will be shallower, especially in the early stages ofself-thinning. This idea is supported by a comparison of self-thinning in normal Arabidopsis thaliana plants with self-thinning
in mutants that overexpress phytochrome A, greatly reducing their
shade tolerance, and making competition amongst them more
asymmetric (Figure 5.33a).
It seems possible, too, to use departures from the assumptions
built into Equations 5.26–5.29 to explain at least some of the varia-tions from a ‘general’ −3/ 2 rule. Osawa and Allen (1993) estimated
a number of the parameters in these equations from data on the growth of individual plants of mountain beech ( Nothofagus 
solandri ) and red pine ( Pinus densiﬂora ). They estimated, for instance,
that the exponents in Equations 5.27 and 5.28 were not 2 and 3,
but 2.08 and 2.19 for mountain beech, and 1.63 and 2.41 for red
pine. These suggest thinning slopes of −1.05 in the ﬁrst case and
−1.48 in the second, which compare quite remarkably well with the
observed slopes of −1.06 and −1.48 (Figure 5.33b). The similarities
between the estimates and observations for the intercept constantswere equally impressive. These results show, therefore, that thinninglines with slopes other than −3/ 2 can occur, but can be explicable
in terms of the detailed biology of the species concerned – andthat even when slopes of −3/ 2 do occur, they may do so, as with
red pine, for the ‘wrong’ reason ( −2.41/1.63 rather than −3/ 2).
•• ••complications of the
geometric argument
101
104105(a)
102103Total mass (g m–2)
Density (plants m–2)10–1100101
Stem density (no. m–2)103104Total stem mass (g m–2)(b)
Figure 5.33 (a) The relationship between total biomass and density in two wild-type strains of Arabidopsis thaliana plants ( 4and /H17039) and 
a phytochrome A overexpressing mutant strain ( /H17033) 15, 22 and 33 days after sowing (bottom to top). Data points give means (±1 SE, n=3).
In each case, the strains were sown at two initial densities; solid black regression lines are shown in each case for the highe r density. The 
steeper dotted black line has a slope of −1/2 (indicative of −3/2 self-thinning) and the shallow line a slope of −1/3 (indicative of −4/3 self-
thinning). Model trajectories for asymmetric ( ) and symmetric ( ) competition are also shown. The mutant strain exhibited shallo wer
thinning lines, indicative of more asymmetric competition. (After Stoll et al. , 2002.) (b) The species boundary line for populations of red pine,
Pinus densiﬂora (slope =−1.48) from northern Japan. (After Osawa & Allen, 1993.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 160INTRASPECIFIC COMPETITION 161
5.12.5 A resource-allocation basis for thinning 
boundaries
The increasing recognition that a variety of slope values might
be expected, even on the geometric argument, along with the statistical difﬁculties of estimating slopes, has left the way openfor alternative explanations for the underlying trend itself. Enquistet al. (1998) made use of the much more general model of West
et al. (1997), which considered the most effective architectural
designs of organisms (not just plants) for distributing acquired
resources throughout those organisms. This suggested that therate of resource use per individual, u, should be related to mean
plant weight, P, according to the equation:
u=aP
3/4(5.30)
where a is a constant. Indeed, Enquist et al. (1998) were also able
to ﬁnd empirical support for this relationship.
They then argued that plants 
have evolved to make full use of theresources available, and so if Sis the 
rate of resource supply per unit area and N
maxthe maximum 
allowable density of plants, then:
S=Nmaxu (5.31)
or, from Equation 5.30:
S=aNmaxP3/4. (5.32)
But when the plants have arrived at an equilibrium with the rate
of resource supply, Sshould itself be constant. Hence:
P=bNmax−4/3, (5.33)
where b is another constant. In short, the expected slope of a population boundary on this argument is −4/3 rather than −3/2.
Enquist and colleagues themselves considered the available data
to be more supportive of their prediction of a slope of −4/ 3 than
the more conventional −3/ 2. This has not, however, been the 
conclusion drawn either from previous data surveys or from the
analysis of subsequent experiments (e.g. Figure 5.33a; Stoll et al.,
2002). In part, the discrepancy may have arisen because the geo-metric argument is focused on light acquisition, and the data col-lected to test it have likewise been focused on above-ground plantparts (photosynthetic or support tissue); whereas Enquist et al. ’s
is a much more general resource-acquisition argument, and at least
some of their data were based on overall plant weights (leaves,shoots and roots). Related to this, Enquist et al. ’s data sets were
focused on maximum densities of large numbers of species,whereas other analyses have focused on the self-thinning process ,which occurs largely before the overall resource-determined
limit has been reached. Again, therefore, there may be no con-tradiction between the two approaches.
5.12.6 Self-thinning in animal populations
Animals, whether they are sessile or mobile, must also ‘self-thin’,
insofar as growing individuals within a cohort increasingly compete with one another and reduce their own density. Thereis nothing linking all animals quite like the shared need for lightinterception that links all plants, so there is even less likelihood
of a general self-thinning ‘law’ for animals. On the other hand,crowded sessile animals can, like plants, be seen as needing to pack‘volumes’ beneath an approximately constant area, and mussels,for example, have been found to follow a thinning line with aslope of −1.4, and barnacles a line with a slope of −1.6 (Hughes
& Grifﬁths, 1988). Moreover, self-thinning in the gregarious tunicate, Pyura praeputialis , on the coast of Chile was found 
to follow a slope of only −1.2; but when the analysis was
modiﬁed to acknowledge that rocky shore invertebrates are
more ‘three-dimensional’ than plants, and may ﬁt more than onelayer into a fully occupied area (as opposed to the constant leaf area index of plants), then the estimated slope was −1.5
(Figure 5.34a).
For mobile animals, it has been suggested that the relation-
ship between metabolic rate and body size could generate thin-ning lines with slopes of −4/3 (Begon et al. , 1986). However, the
generality of this is probably even more questionable than the ‘rules’in plants, given variations in resource supply, variations in thecoefﬁcients in the underlying relationships, and the possibilitiesof self-thinning depending on, say, territorial behavior ratherthan simply food availability (Steingrimsson & Grant, 1999).Nonetheless, evidence of self-thinning in animals is increasingly
reported, especially in ﬁsh, even if the basis for it remains uncer-tain (e.g. Figure 5.34b).
Plants are not so consistent in their pattern of self-thinning as
was once thought. It may be that animals are not much less boundthan plants by ‘general’ self-thinning rules.
Summary
Intraspeciﬁc competition is deﬁned and explained. Exploitation 
and interference are distinguished, and the commonly one-sidednature of competition is emphasized.
We describe the effects of intraspeciﬁc competition on rates
of mortality and fecundity, distinguishing under-, over- and
exactly compensating density dependence. We explain, how-ever, that density itself is usually just a convenient expression ofcrowding or shortage of resources.
•• ••−4/3 or −3/2?EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 161••162 CHAPTER 5
These effects at the individual level lead in turn to patterns,
and regulatory tendencies, at the population level. The carrying
capacity is deﬁned and its limitations are explained, along withthe domed nature of net recruitment curves and the sigmoidalnature of population growth curves.
We describe the effects of intraspeciﬁc competition on rates
of growth, explaining the ‘law of constant ﬁnal yield’, especially
in modular organisms.
The use of kvalues in quantifying intraspeciﬁc competition is
described, and scramble and contest competition are distinguished.
We introduce the use of mathematical models in ecology 
generally, then go on to develop a model of a population withdiscrete breeding seasons subject to intraspeciﬁc competition. Themodel illustrates the tendency of time lags to provoke popu-
lation ﬂuctuations and that different types of competition may lead to different types of population dynamics, including patternsof deterministic chaos – the nature and importance of which arethemselves explained. A model with continuous breeding is alsodeveloped, leading to the logistic equation.
The importance of individual differences in generating 
asymmetries in competition is explained, as is the importance of competition in generating individual differences. Asymmetriestend to enhance regulation; territoriality is a particularly import-ant example of this.
The progressive effects of competition on growth and mor-
tality may often be interlinked in the process of self-thinning, whichhas been a particular focus in plant populations. We explain the
nature of dynamic thinning lines and the −3/ 2 power law when
single cohorts are followed, and also species and populationboundary lines when a series of crowded populations is observedat different densities. We address the question of whether thereis a single boundary line for all species.
We explain how two broad types of explanation for the con-
sistent trend amongst species have been proposed: those basedon geometry and those based on resource allocation in plants ofdifferent sizes.
Finally we examine self-thinning in animal populations and 
conclude that plants are not so consistent in their pattern of self-thinning as was once thought, while animals are not much lessbound than plants by ‘general’ self-thinning rules.(a)Log dry mass (g)
–0.1
1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5–0.50.00.51.0
Log density (individuals m–2)
(b)
Weight of trout (g)
0.01
5 500.5
10 100 50010000.050.1151050100500
Density (fish 60 m–2)
Figure 5.34 (a) Self-thinning in the gregarious tunicate, Pyura
praeputialis , where density has been modiﬁed to include an
‘effective area’ which incorporates the number of layers in the
tunicate colonies. The estimated slope is −1.49 (95% CI −1.59 
to −1.39, P< 0.001). (After Guiñez & Castilla, 2001.) (b) Dynamic
thinning lines for 23 year-classes of sea trout, Salmo trutta , from 
an English Lake District stream, with the position of the mean
regression line (slope =−1.35) indicated by the arrows 
(After Elliott, 1993.)EIPC05  10/24/05  1:54 PM  Page 162••6.1 Introduction
All organisms in nature are where we ﬁnd them because they 
have moved there. This is true for even the most apparently sedentary of organisms, such as oysters and redwood trees. Theirmovements range from the passive transport that affects manyplant seeds to the apparently purposeful actions of many mobile
animals. Dispersal and migration are used to describe aspects of the
movement of organisms. The terms are deﬁned for groups of organ-isms, although it is of course the individual that moves.
Dispersal is most often taken to
mean a spreading of individuals awayfrom others, and is therefore an ap-propriate description for several kinds of movements: (i) of plant seeds or
starﬁsh larvae away from each other and their parents; (ii) of voles
from one area of grassland to another, usually leaving residentsbehind and being counterbalanced by the dispersal of other volesin the other direction; and (iii) of land birds amongst an archipelagoof islands (or aphids amongst a mixed stand of plants) in the searchfor a suitable habitat.
Migration is most often taken to mean the mass directional
movements of large numbers of a species from one location toanother. The term therefore applies to classic migrations (the move-ments of locust swarms, the intercontinental journeys of birds)but also to less obvious examples like the to and fro movementsof shore animals following the tidal cycle. Whatever the precisedetails of dispersal in particular cases, it will be useful in this chapter to divide the process into three phases: starting ,moving
and stopping (South et al. , 2002) or, put another way, emigration ,
transfer and immigration (Ims & Yoccoz, 1997). The three phases
differ (and the questions we ask about them differ) both from 
a behavioral point of view (what triggers the initiation and cessation of movement?, etc.) and from a demographic point ofview (the distinction between loss and gain of individuals, etc.).The division into these phases also emphasizes that dispersal can
refer to the process by which individuals, in leaving, escape fromthe immediate environment of their parents and neighbors; but itcan also often involve a large element of discovery or even explora-tion. It is useful, too, to distinguish between natal dispersal and
breeding dispersal (Clobert et al. , 2001). The former refers to the
movement between the natal area (i.e. where the individual was
born) and where breeding ﬁrst takes place. This is the only type
of dispersal possible in a plant. Breeding dispersal is movementbetween two successive breeding areas.
6.2 Active and passive dispersal
Like most biological categories, the distinction between active and
passive dispersers is blurred at the edges. Passive dispersal in aircurrents, for example, is not restricted to plants. Young spidersthat climb to high places and then release a gossamer thread thatcarries them on the wind are then passively at the mercy of 
air currents; i.e. ‘starting’ is active but moving itself is effectively passive. Even the wings of insects are often simply aids to whatis effectively passive movement (Figure 6.1).
6.2.1 Passive dispersal: the seed rain
Most seeds fall close to the parent and their density declines with
distance from that parent. This is the case for wind-dispersed seedsand also for those that are ejected actively by maternal tissue (e.g.many legumes) .The eventual destination of the dispersed offspring
is determined by the original location of the parent and by the
relationship relating disperser density to distance from parent, but the detailed microhabitat of that destination is left to chance.Dispersal is nonexploratory; discovery is a matter of chance.Some animals have essentially this same type of dispersal. For the meanings of
‘dispersal’ and‘migration’
Chapter 6
Dispersal, Dormancy 
and MetapopulationsEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 163164 CHAPTER 6
example, the dispersal of most pond-dwelling organisms without
a free-ﬂying stage depends on resistant wind-blown structures (e.g.gemmules of sponges, cysts of brine shrimps).
The density of seeds is often low immediately under the 
parent, rises to a peak close by and then falls off steeply with 
distance (Figure 6.2a). However, there are immense practicalproblems in studying seed dispersal (i.e. in following the seeds),and these become increasingly irresolvable further from thesource. Greene and Calogeropoulos (2001) liken any assertion that‘most seeds travel short distances’ to a claim that most lost keysand contact lenses fall close to streetlights. Certainly, the very fewstudies of long-distance dispersal that have been carried out 
suggest that seed density declines only very slowly at larger distances from the original source (Figure 6.2b), and even a fewlong-distance dispersers may be crucial in either invasion orrecolonization dispersal (see Section 6.3.1).
6.2.2 Passive dispersal by a mutualistic agent
Uncertainty of destination may be reduced if an active agent ofdispersal is involved. The seeds of many herbs of the woodland
•• ••0.0
≤0.3
≤0.6
≤0.9
≤1.1
>1.10.0
≤0.25
≤0.5
≤0.75
≤1.0
>1.25(a) (b)
Figure 6.1 Spring densities of the winged form of the aphid, Aphis fabae , in large part reﬂect their carriage on the wind. (a) A. fabae eggs
are found on spindle plants and their distribution in the UK over winter reﬂects that of the plants (log10geometric mean number of eggs
per 100 spindle buds). (b) But by spring, although the highest densities are in spindle regions, the aphids have dispersed on t he wind over
the whole country (log10geometric mean aerial density). (After Compton, 2001; from Cammell et al. , 1989.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 164DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 165
ﬂoor have spines or prickles that increase their chance of being
carried passively on the coats of animals. The seeds may then beconcentrated in nests or burrows when the animal grooms itself.The fruits of many shrubs and lower canopy trees are ﬂeshy andattractive to birds, and the seed coats resist digestion in the gut.
Where the seed is dispersed to is then somewhat less certain,depending on the defecating behavior of the bird. It is usually presumed that such associations are ‘mutualistic’ (beneﬁcial to both parties – see Chaper 13): the seed is dispersed in a more orless predictable fashion; the disperser consumes either the ﬂeshy‘reward’ or a proportion of the seeds (those that it ﬁnds again).
There are also important examples in which animals are dis-
persed by an active agent. For instance, there are many speciesof mite that are taken very effectively and directly from dung 
pat to dung pat, or from one piece of carrion to another, by attaching themselves to dung or carrion beetles. They usually attachto a newly emerging adult, and leave again when that adult reachesa new patch of dung or carrion. This, too, is typically mutualis-tic: the mites gain a dispersive agent, and many of them attackand eat the eggs of ﬂies that would otherwise compete with thebeetles.6.2.3 Active discovery and exploration
Many other animals cannot be said to explore, but they certainly
control their settlement (‘stopping’, see Section 6.1.1) and ceasemovement only when an acceptable site has been found. For example, most aphids, even in their winged form, have powersof ﬂight that are too weak to counteract the forces of prevailing
winds. But they control their take-off from their site of origin,they control when they drop out of the windstream, and they make additional, often small-scale ﬂights if their original site of settlement is unsatisfactory. In a precisely analogous manner,the larvae of many river invertebrates make use of the ﬂowingcolumn of water for dispersing from hatching sites to appropri-ate microhabitats (‘invertebrate drift’) (Brittain & Eikeland, 1988).The dispersal of aphids in the wind and of drifting invertebratesin streams, therefore, involves ‘discovery’, over which they have
some, albeit limited, control.
Other animals explore, visiting many sites before returning to
a favored suitable one. For example, in contrast to their driftinglarvae, most adults of freshwater insects depend on ﬂight forupstream dispersal and movement from stream to stream. They
•• ••
% of density at edge of source area
2500 1000 50000110100
Distance (m)(b)
1500 2000Seeds per m2
120 60 2000102030
40
Distance (m)(a)
51525
80 100Fraxinus
Lonchocarpus
Platypodium
Betula
Pinus
Tilia
Figure 6.2 (a) The density of wind-
dispersed seeds from solitary trees within
forests. The studies had a reasonabledensity of sampling points, there were nonearby conspeciﬁc trees and the source tree
was neither in a clearing nor at the forestedge. (b) Observed long-distance dispersalup to 1.6 km of wind dispersed seeds froma forested source area. (After Greene &Calogeropoulos, 2001, where the originaldata sources may also be found.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 165166 CHAPTER 6
explore and, if successful, discover, suitable sites within which to
lay their eggs: starting, moving and stopping are all under activecontrol.
6.2.4 Clonal dispersal
In almost all modular organisms (see Section 4.2.1), an individualgenet branches and spreads its parts around it as it grows. Thereis a sense, therefore, in which a developing tree or coral activelydisperses its modules into, and explores, the surrounding environ-ment. The interconnections of such a clone often decay, so that
it becomes represented by a number of dispersed parts. This mayresult ultimately in the product of one zygote being representedby a clone of great age that is spread over great distances. Someclones of the rhizomatous bracken fern ( Pteridium aquilinum )
were estimated to be more than 1400 years old and one extendedover an area of nearly 14 ha (Oinonen, 1967).
We can recognize two extremes in
a continuum of strategies in clonal dis-persal (Lovett Doust & Lovett Doust,
1982; Sackville Hamilton et al. , 1987). At
one extreme, the connections between modules are long and themodules themselves are widely spaced. These have been called‘guerrilla’ forms, because they give the plant, hydroid or coral acharacter like that of a guerrilla army. Fugitive and opportunist,they are constantly on the move, disappearing from some ter-ritories and penetrating into others. At the other extreme are ‘phalanx’ forms, named by analogy with the phalanxes of a Romanarmy, tightly packed with their shields held around them. Here,the connections are short and the modules are tightly packed, andthe organisms expand their clones slowly, retain their original site occupancy for long periods, and neither penetrate readilyamongst neighboring plants nor are easily penetrated by them.
Even amongst trees, it is easy to see that the way in which
the buds are placed gives them a guerrilla or a phalanx type of
growth form. The dense packing of shoot modules in species like cypresses ( Cupressus ) produces a relatively undispersed and
impenetrable phalanx canopy, whilst many loose-structured,broad-leaved trees ( Acacia ,Betula ) can be seen as guerrilla canopies,
bearing buds that are widely dispersed and shoots that interweavewith the buds and branches of neighbors. The twining or clam-bering lianas in a forest are guerrilla growth forms par excellence ,
dispersing their foliage and buds over immense distances, bothvertically and laterally.
The way in which modular organisms disperse and display their
modules affects the ways in which they interact with their neigh-bors. Those with a guerrilla form will continually meet and com-pete with other species and other genets of their own kind. Witha phalanx structure, however, most meetings will be between modules of a single genet. For a tussock grass or a cypress tree,competition must occur very largely between parts of itself.Clonal growth is most effective as a means of dispersal in aquatic
environments. Many aquatic plants fragment easily, and the parts
of a single clone become independently dispersed because theyare not dependent on the presence of roots to maintain their 
water relations. The major aquatic weed problems of the worldare caused by plants that multiply as clones and fragment and fall to pieces as they grow: duckweeds ( Lemna spp.), the water
hyacinth ( Eichhornia crassipes ), Canadian pond weed ( Elodea
Canadensis ) and the water fern Salvinia .
6.3 Patterns of distribution: dispersion
The movements of organisms affect the spatial pattern of theirdistribution (their dispersion ) and we can recognize three main pat-
terns of dispersion, although they too form part of a continuum(Figure 6.3).
Random dispersion occurs when
there is an equal probability of an
organism occupying any point in space(irrespective of the position of any others). The result is that individuals are unevenly distributedbecause of chance events.
Regular dispersion (also called a uniform oreven distribution or
overdispersion ) occurs either when an individual has a tendency to
avoid other individuals, or when individuals that are especiallyclose to others die. The result is that individuals are more evenly
spaced than expected by chance.
Aggregated dispersion (also called a contagious or clumped dis-
tribution or underdispersion ) occurs either when individuals tend
to be attracted to (or are more likely to survive in) particular partsof the environment, or when the presence of one individual
•• ••Aggregated Regular Random
Figure 6.3 Three generalized spatial patterns that may be
exhibited by organisms across their habitats.guerrillas and
phalanx-formersrandom, regular and aggregateddistributionsEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 166DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 167
attracts, or gives rise to, another close to it. The result is that 
individuals are closer together than expected by chance.
How these patterns appear to an observer, however, and their
relevance to the life of other organisms, depends on the spatialscale at which they are viewed. Consider the distribution of an
aphid living on a particular species of tree in a woodland. At alarge scale, the aphids will appear to be aggregated in particularparts of the world, i.e. in woodlands as opposed to other typesof habitat. If samples are smaller and taken only in woodlands,the aphids will still appear to be aggregated, but now on theirhost tree species rather than on trees in general. However, if samples are smaller still (25 cm
2, about the size of a leaf ) and are
taken within the canopy of a single tree, the aphids might appear
to be randomly distributed over the tree as a whole. At an evensmaller scale ( c. 1 cm
2) we might detect a regular distribution
because individual aphids on a leaf avoid one another.
6.3.1 Patchiness
In practice, the populations of all spe-cies are patchily distributed at somescale or another, but it is crucial todescribe dispersion at scales that are
relevant to the lifestyle of the organisms concerned. MacArthur
and Levins (1964) introduced the concept of environmental grain
to make this point. For example, the canopy of an oak–hickoryforest, from the point of view of a bird like the scarlet tanager(Piranga olivacea ) that forages indiscriminately in both oaks and
hickories, is ﬁne grained : i.e. it is patchy, but the birds experience
the habitat as an oak–hickory mixture. The habitat is coarse
grained , however, for defoliating insects that attack either oaks or
hickories preferentially: they experience the habitat one patch ata time, moving from one preferred patch to another (Figure 6.4).
Patchiness may be a feature of the physical environment:
islands surrounded by water, rocky outcrops in a moorland, and
so on. Equally important, patchiness may be created by theactivities of organisms themselves; by their grazing, the deposi-tion of dung, trampling or by the local depletion of water andmineral resources. Patches in the environment that are createdby the activity of organisms have life histories. A gap created ina forest by a falling tree is colonized and grows up to contain maturetrees, whilst other trees fall and create new gaps. The dead leafin a grassland area is a patch for colonization by a succession offungi and bacteria that eventually exhaust it as a resource, butnew dead leaves arise and are colonized elsewhere.
Patchiness, dispersal and scale are tied intimately together. 
A framework that is useful in thinking about this distinguishes
between local and landscape scales (though what is ‘local’ to aworm is very different from what is local to the bird that eats it)and between turnover and invasion dispersal (Bullock et al. , 2002).
Turnover dispersal at the local scale describes the movement intoa gap from occupied habitat immediately surrounding the gap;
whereas that gap may also be invaded or colonized by individualsmoving in from elsewhere in the surrounding community. At thelandscape scale, similarly, dispersal may be part of an on-goingturnover of extinction and recolonization of occupiable patcheswithin an otherwise unsuitable habitat matrix (e.g. islands in astream: ‘metapopulation dynamics’ – see Section 6.9, below), ordispersal may result in the invasion of habitat by a ‘new’ speciesexpanding its range.
6.3.2 Forces favoring aggregations (in space and time)
The simplest evolutionary explanation for the patchiness of popu-
lations is that organisms aggregate when and where they ﬁndresources and conditions that favor reproduction and survival.These resources and conditions are usually patchily distributedin both space and time. It pays (and has paid in evolutionary time)
•• ••(a)
(Time 1 and time
2 and time 3 .....)
(Time 1 and time2 and time 3 .....)
(b)
Time 5Time 4Time 3Time 1 Time 2
Figure 6.4 The ‘grain’ of the environment must be seen from
the perspective of the organism concerned. (a) An organism 
that is small or moves little is likely to see the environment as coarse-grained: it experiences only one habitat type within the environment for long periods or perhaps all of its life. 
(b) An organism that is larger or moves more may see the sameenvironment as ﬁne-grained: it moves frequently between habitattypes and hence samples them in the proportion in which theyoccur in the environment as a whole.ﬁne- and coarse-
grained environmentsEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 167168 CHAPTER 6
to disperse to these patches when and where they occur. There
are, however, other speciﬁc ways in which organisms may gainfrom being close to neighbors in space and time.
An elegant theory identifying a
selective advantage to individuals that
aggregate with others was suggestedby Hamilton (1971) in his paper
‘Geometry for the selﬁsh herd’. He argued that the risk to an individual from a predator may be lessened if it places anotherpotential prey individual between itself and the predator. The consequence of many individuals doing this is bound to be an aggregation. The ‘domain of danger’ for individuals in a herd isat the edge, so that an individual would gain an advantage if its social status allowed it to assimilate into the center of a herd.
Subordinate individuals might then be forced into the regions ofgreater danger on the edge of the ﬂock. This seems to be the casein reindeer ( Rangifer tarandus ) and woodpigeons ( Columba palum-
bus), where a newcomer may have to join the herd or ﬂock at its
risky perimeter and can only establish itself in a more protected
position within the ﬂock after social interaction (Murton et al. , 1966).
Individuals may also gain from living in groups if this helps tolocate food, give warning of predators or if it pays for individualsto join forces in ﬁghting off a predator (Pulliam & Caraco, 1984).
The principle of the selﬁsh herd as described for the aggrega-
tion of organisms in space is just as appropriate for the synchronousappearance of organisms in time. The individual that is precociousor delayed in its appearance, outside the norm for its population,
may be at greater risk from predators than those conformist indi-viduals that take part in ‘ﬂooding the market’ thereby diluting theirown risk. Amongst the most remarkable examples of synchronyare the ‘periodic cicadas’ (insects), the adults of which emerge simul-taneously after 13 or 17 years of life underground as nymphs.Williams et al. (1993) studied the mortality of populations of 
13-year periodic cicadas that emerged in northwestern Arkansasin 1985. Birds consumed almost all of the standing crop ofcicadas when the density was low, but only 15–40% when thecicadas reached peak density. Predation then rose to near 100%as the cicada density fell again (Figure 6.5). Equivalent arguments
apply to the many species of tree, especially in temperate regions,that have synchronous ‘mast’ years (see Section 9.4).
6.3.3 Forces diluting aggregations: density-dependent
dispersal
There are also strong selective pressures that can act against
aggregation in space or time. In some species a group of individualsmay actually concentrate a predator’s attention (the oppositeeffect to the ‘selﬁsh herd’). However, the foremost diluting forcesare certain to be the more intense competition suffered by
crowded individuals (see Chapter 5) and the direct interferencebetween such individuals even in the absence of a shortage ofresources. One likely consequence is that the highest rates of dispersal will be away from the most crowded patches: density-dependent emigration dispersal (Figure 6.6) (Sutherland et al., 2002),
though as we shall see below, density-dependent dispersal is byno means a general rule.
Overall, though, the types of distribution over available
patches found in nature are bound to be compromises between
forces attracting individuals to disperse towards one another andforces provoking individuals to disperse away from one another.As we shall see in a later chapter, such compromises are con-ventionally crystallized in the ‘ideal free’ and other theoretical distributions (see Section 9.6.3).
6.4 Patterns of migration
6.4.1 Tidal, diurnal and seasonal movements
Individuals of many species move en masse from one habitat 
to another and back again repeatedly during their life. The
timescale involved may be hours, days, months or years. Insome cases, these movements have the effect of maintaining the
•• ••aggregation and 
the selﬁsh herd
Numbers (103 m–2)
0200040006000
Predation (%)
02040100
6080
Standing crop
Predation (%)
62 4 9 2 9
May JuneFigure 6.5 Changes in the density of a
population of 13-year periodical cicadas 
in northwestern Arkansas in 1985, andchanges in the percentage eaten by birds.(After Williams et al. , 1993.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 168DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 169
organism in the same type of environment. This is the case in
the movement of crabs on a shoreline: they move with theadvance and retreat of the tide. In other cases, diurnal migrationmay involve moving between two environments: the funda-mental niches of these species can only be satisﬁed by alternat-
ing life in two distinct habitats within each day of their lives. Forexample, some planktonic algae both in the sea and in lakes descendto the depths at night but move to the surface during the day.They accumulate phosphorus and perhaps other nutrients in thedeeper water at night before returning to photosynthesize nearthe surface during daylight hours (Salonen et al., 1984). Other species
aggregate into tight populations during a resting period and separate from each other when feeding. For example, most landsnails rest in conﬁned humid microhabitats by day, but range widely
when they search for food by night.
Many organisms make seasonal migrations – again, either
tracking a favorable habitat or beneﬁtting from different, complementary habitats. The altitudinal migration of grazing ani-mals in mountainous regions is one example. The American elk(Cervus elaphus ) and mule deer ( Odocoileus hemionus ), for instance,
move up into high mountain areas in the summer and down tothe valleys in the winter. By migrating seasonally the animals escapethe major changes in food supply and climate that they wouldmeet if they stayed in the same place. This can be contrasted withthe ‘migration’ of amphibians (frogs, toads, newts) between anaquatic breeding habitat in spring and a terrestrial environmentfor the remainder of the year. The young develop (as tadpoles)
in water with a different food resource from that which they willlater eat on land. They will return to the same aquatic habitatfor mating, aggregate into dense populations for a time and thenseparate to lead more isolated lives on land.6.4.2 Long-distance migration
The most remarkable habitat shifts are
those that involve traveling very longdistances. Many terrestrial birds in the northern hemispheremove north in the spring when food supplies become abundantduring the warm summer period, and move south to savannas
in the fall when food becomes abundant only after the rainy season. Both are areas in which seasons of comparative glut andfamine alternate. Migrants then make a large contribution to thediversity of a local fauna. Of the 589 species of birds (excludingseabirds) that breed in the Palaearctic (temperate Europe and Asia),40% spend the winter elsewhere (Moreau, 1952). Of those speciesthat leave for the winter, 98% travel south to Africa. On an evenlarger scale, the Arctic tern ( Sterna paradisaea ) travels from its Arctic
breeding ground to the Antarctic pack ice and back each year –
about 10,000 miles (16,100 km) each way (although unlike manyother migrants it can feed on its journey).
The same species may behave in different ways in different
places. All robins ( Erithacus rubecula ) leave Finland and Sweden
in winter, but on the Canary Islands the species is resident thewhole year-round. In most of the intervening countries, a part of the population migrates and a part remains resident. Such variations are in some cases associated with clear evolutionary divergence. This is true of the knot ( Calidris canutus ), a species of
small wading bird mostly breeding in remote areas of the Arctictundras and ‘wintering’ in the summers of the southern hemisphere.At least ﬁve subspecies appear to have diverged in the LatePleistocene (based on genetic evidence from the sequencing of
mitochondrial DNA), and these now have strikingly differentpatterns of distribution and migration (Figure 6.7).
•• ••001
Number of larvae per mm216 8.5(a)
0075
Number of pairs2000 100050(b) Emigration Observed dispersal
Natal dispersal (%)Dispersal rate (log scale)25
Figure 6.6 Density-dependent dispersal. (a) The dispersal rates of newly hatched blackﬂy ( Simulium vittatum ) larvae increase with
increasing density. (Data from Fonseca & Hart, 1996.) (b) The percentage of juvenile male barnacle geese, Branta leucopsis , dispersing 
from breeding colonies on islands in the Baltic Sea to non-natal breeding locations increased as density increased. (Data from van der 
Juegd 1999.) (After Sutherland et al. , 2002.)
birdsEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 169170 CHAPTER 6
Long-distance migration is a feature of many other groups too.
Baleen whales in the southern hemisphere move south in sum-
mer to feed in the food-rich waters of the Antarctic. In winterthey move north to breed (but scarcely to feed) in tropical andsubtropical waters. Caribou ( Rangifer tarandus ) travel several
hundred kilometers per year from northern forests to the tundra
and back. In all of these examples, an individual of the migratingspecies may make the return journey several times.
Many long-distance migrants, how-
ever, make only one return journeyduring their lifetime. They are born in
one habitat, make their major growth in another habitat, but then return to breed and die in the home of their infancy. Eelsand migratory salmon provide classic examples. The European
eel ( Anguilla anguilla ) travels from European rivers, ponds and lakes
across the Atlantic to the Sargasso Sea, where it is thought to repro-duce and die (although spawning adults and eggs have never actu-ally been caught there). The American eel ( Anguilla rostrata ) makes
a comparable journey from areas ranging between the Guianasin the south, to southwest Greenland in the north. Salmon makea comparable transition, but from a freshwater egg and juvenile
phase to mature as a marine adult. The ﬁsh then returns to freshwater sites to lay eggs. After spawning, all Paciﬁc salmon(Oncorhynchus nerka ) die without ever returning to the sea. Many
Atlantic salmon ( Salmo salar ) also die after spawning, but some
survive to return to the sea and then migrate back upstream to
spawn again.
6.4.3 ‘One-way only’ migration
In some migratory species, the journey for an individual is on a
strictly one-way ticket. In Europe, the clouded yellow ( Colias croceus ),
red admiral ( Vanessa atalanta ) and painted lady ( Vanessa cardui )
butterﬂies breed at both ends of their migrations. The individualsthat reach Great Britain in the summer breed there, and their off-
spring ﬂy south in autumn and breed in the Mediterranean region
– the offspring of these in turn come north in the following summer.
Most migrations occur seasonally in the life of individuals 
or of populations. They usually seem to be triggered by some 
•• ••Breeding area
Staging area
Wintering area
Staging and wintering area
Migratory corridors180°
0°
140°
30°
45°
100°
60°
20°
20°20°30°
60°100°140°180°160°30°
45°0°
30°
75°60°roselaari
rogersi
canutusrufa
islandica
islandica
canutus
Figure 6.7 Global distribution and migration pattern of knots ( Calidris spp.). Solid shading indicates the breeding areas; horizontally
striped spots indicate the stop-over areas, used only during south- and northward migration; the cross-hatched spots indicate t he areas 
used both as stop-over and wintering sites; and the vertically striped spots designate areas used only for wintering. The gray shaded
corridors indicate proven migration routes; the broken-shaded corridors indicate tentative migration routes suggested in the li terature.
(After Piersma & Davidson, 1992.)
eels and salmonEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 170DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 171
external seasonal phenomenon (e.g. changing day length), and
sometimes also by an internal physiological clock. They are often preceded by quite profound physiological changes such as the accumulation of body fat. They represent strategies evolved inenvironments where seasonal events like rainfall and temperature
cycles are reliably repeated from year to year. There is, however,a type of migration that is tactical, forced by events such as over-crowding, and appears to have no cycle or regularity. These aremost common in environments where rainfall is not seasonallyreliable. The economically disastrous migration plagues of locustsin arid and semiarid regions are the most striking examples.
6.5 Dormancy: migration in time
An organism gains in ﬁtness by dispersing its progeny as long 
as the progeny are more likely to leave descendants than if theyremained undispersed. Similarly, an organism gains in ﬁtness bydelaying its arrival on the scene, so long as the delay increases itschances of leaving descendants. This will often be the case when
conditions in the future are likely to be better than those in thepresent. Thus, a delay in the recruitment of an individual to apopulation may be regarded as ‘migration in time’.
Organisms generally spend their period of delay in a state of
dormancy. This relatively inactive state has the beneﬁt of conserving
energy, which can then be used during the period following thedelay. In addition, the dormant phase of an organism is often moretolerant of the adverse environmental conditions prevailing dur-ing the delay (i.e. tolerant of drought, extremes of temperature,
lack of light and so on). Dormancy can be either predictive or
consequential (Müller, 1970). Predictive dormancy is initiated in
advance of the adverse conditions, and is most often found in predictable, seasonal environments. It is generally referred to as‘diapause’ in animals, and in plants as ‘innate’ or ‘primary’ dormancy(Harper, 1977). Consequential (or ‘secondary’) dormancy, on the other hand, is initiated in response to the adverse conditionsthemselves.
6.5.1 Dormancy in animals: diapause
Diapause has been most intensively studied in insects, where 
examples occur in all developmental stages. The common ﬁeldgrasshopper Chorthippus brunneus is a fairly typical example. This
annual species passes through an obligatory diapause in its egg stage,
where, in a state of arrested development, it is resistant to the
cold winter conditions that would quickly kill the nymphs andadults. In fact, the eggs require a long cold period before develop-ment can start again (around 5 weeks at 0°C, or rather longer ata slightly higher temperature) (Richards & Waloff, 1954). Thisensures that the eggs are not affected by a short, freak period of warm winter weather that might then be followed by normal,dangerous, cold conditions. It also means that there is an
enhanced synchronization of subsequent development in thepopulation as a whole. The grasshoppers ‘migrate in time’ fromlate summer to the following spring.
Diapause is also common in species
with more than one generation peryear. For instance, the fruit-ﬂy Droso-
phila obscura passes through four generations per year in
England, but enters diapause during only one of them (Begon,1976). This facultative diapause shares important features with 
obligatory diapause: it enhances survivorship during a predictablyadverse winter period, and it is experienced by resistant diapause
adults with arrested gonadal development and large reserves of stored abdominal fat. In this case, synchronization is achievednot only during diapause but also prior to it. Emerging adults react to the short daylengths of the fall by laying down fat and
entering the diapause state; they recommence development inresponse to the longer days of spring. Thus, by relying, like manyspecies, on the utterly predictable photoperiod as a cue for seasonal
development, D. obscura enters a state of predictive diapause that
is conﬁned to those generations that inevitably pass through theadverse conditions.
Consequential dormancy may be expected to evolve in envir-
onments that are relatively unpredictable. In such circumstances,there will be a disadvantage in responding to adverse conditionsonly after they have appeared, but this may be outweighed bythe advantages of: (i) responding to favorable conditions immedi-
ately after they reappear; and (ii) entering a dormant state only if
adverse conditions do appear. Thus, when many mammals enter
hibernation, they do so (after an obligatory preparatory phase) 
in direct response to the adverse conditions. Having achieved ‘resist-ance’ by virtue of the energy they conserve at a lowered bodytemperature, and having periodically emerged and monitored theirenvironment, they eventually cease hibernation whenever theadversity disappears.
6.5.2 Dormancy in plants
Seed dormancy is an extremely widespread phenomenon in
ﬂowering plants. The young embryo ceases development whilststill attached to the mother plant and enters a phase of suspendedactivity, usually losing much of its water and becoming dormantin a desiccated condition. In a few species of higher plants, such
as some mangroves, a dormant period is absent, but this is verymuch the exception – almost all seeds are dormant when theyare shed from the parent and require special stimuli to return themto an active state (germination).
Dormancy in plants, though, is not conﬁned to seeds. For 
example, as the sand sedge Carex arenaria grows, it tends to 
accumulate dormant buds along the length of its predominantlylinear rhizome. These may remain alive but dormant long after
•• ••the importance of
photoperiodEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 171172 CHAPTER 6
the shoots with which they were produced have died, and they
have been found in numbers of up to 400–500 m−2(Noble et al. ,
1979). They play a role analogous to the bank of dormant seedsproduced by other species.
Indeed, the very widespread habit of deciduousness is a form
of dormancy displayed by many perennial trees and shrubs.
Established individuals pass through periods, usually of low temperatures and low light levels, in a leaﬂess state of low 
metabolic activity.
Three types of dormancy have
been distinguished.
1Innate dormancy is a state in which there is an absolute
requirement for some special external stimulus to reactivate
the process of growth and development. The stimulus maybe the presence of water, low temperature, light, photoperiodor an appropriate balance of near- and far-red radiation.Seedlings of such species tend to appear in sudden ﬂushes of almost simultaneous germination. Deciduousness is also anexample of innate dormancy.
2Enforced dormancy is a state imposed by external conditions 
(i.e. it is consequential dormancy). For example, the Missourigoldenrod Solidago missouriensis enters a dormant state when
attacked by the beetle Trirhabda canadensis . Eight clones,
identiﬁed by genetic markers, were followed prior to, duringand after a period of severe defoliation. The clones, which varied in extent from 60 to 350 m
2and from 700 to 20,000 
rhizomes, failed to produce any above-ground growth (i.e. 
they were dormant) in the season following defoliation andhad apparently died, but they reappeared 1–10 years after theyhad disappeared, and six of the eight bounced back strongly
within a single season (Figure 6.8). Generally, the progeny of a single plant with enforced dormancy may be dispersed in time over years, decades or even centuries. Seeds ofChenopodium album collected from archeological excavations have
been shown to be viable when 1700 years old (Ødum, 1965).
3Induced dormancy is a state produced in a seed during a period
of enforced dormancy in which it acquires some new require-ment before it can germinate. The seeds of many agriculturaland horticultural weeds will germinate without a light stim-
ulus when they are released from the parent; but after aperiod of enforced dormancy they require exposure to lightbefore they will germinate. For a long time it was a puzzlethat soil samples taken from the ﬁeld to the laboratory wouldquickly generate huge crops of seedlings, although these sameseeds had failed to germinate in the ﬁeld. It was a simple ideaof genius that prompted Wesson and Wareing (1969) to col-lect soil samples from the ﬁeld at night and bring them to thelaboratory in darkness. They obtained large crops of seedlingsfrom the soil only when the samples were exposed to light.This type of induced dormancy is responsible for the accu-mulation of large populations of seeds in the soil. In naturethey germinate only when they are brought to the soil 
surface by earthworms or other burrowing animals, or by theexposure of soil after a tree falls.
Seed dormancy may be induced by radiation that contains a relatively high ratio of far-red (730 nm) to near-red (approx-imately 660 nm) wavelengths, a spectral composition character-istic of light that has ﬁltered through a leafy canopy. In nature,
this must have the effect of holding sensitive seeds in the dormant state when they land on the ground under a canopy, whilst releasing them into germination only when the over-topping plants have died away.
Most of the species of plants with seeds that persist for long
in the soil are annuals and biennials, and they are mainly weedyspecies – opportunists waiting (literally) for an opening. They largelylack features that will disperse them extensively in space. The seedsof trees, by contrast, usually have a very short expectation of lifein the soil, and many are extremely difﬁcult to store artiﬁcially formore than 1 year. The seeds of many tropical trees are particu-larly short lived: a matter of weeks or even days. Amongst trees,
•• ••innate, enforced and
induced dormancy(a)
Period 1 Period 2
Defoliated clone territory recovered (%)
1990 1995 200060m2
15,000
(b)150m2
7500
(c)350m2
20,000
(d)170m2
3000
(e) 40m2
3700
(f)150m2
12,000
(g)150m2
12,000
(h)150m2
12,000100
0
1000
100
0
100
0
100
0
100
0
100
0
100
0
Year
Figure 6.8 The histories of eight Missouri goldenrod ( Solidago
missouriensis ) clones (rows a–h). Each clone’s predefoliation 
area (m2) and estimated number of ramets is given on the left. 
The panels show a 15-year record of the presence (shading) and
absence of ramets in each clone’s territory. The arrowheads showthe beginning of dormancy, initiated by a Trirhabda canadensis
eruption and defoliation. Reoccupation of entire or major
segments of the original clone’s territory by postdormancy rametsis expressed as the percentage of the original clone’s territory.(After Morrow & Olfelt, 2003.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 172DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 173
the most striking longevity is seen in those that retain the seeds
in cones or pods on the tree until they are released after ﬁre (manyspecies of Eucalyptus and Pinus ). This phenomenon of serotiny pro-
tects the seeds against risks on the ground until ﬁre creates anenvironment suitable for their rapid establishment.
6.6 Dispersal and density
Density-dependent emigration was identiﬁed in Section 6.3.3 asa frequent response to overcrowding. We turn now to the moregeneral issue of the density dependence of dispersal and also tothe evolutionary forces that may have led to any density depen-dences that are apparent. In doing so, it is important to bear in
mind the point made earlier (see Section 6.1.1): that ‘effective’ dis-persal (from one place to another) requires emigration, transferandimmigration. The density dependences of the three need not
be the same.
6.6.1 Inbreeding and outbreeding
Much of this chapter is devoted to the demographic or ecological
consequences of dispersal, but there are also important geneticand evolutionary consequences. Any evolutionary ‘consequence’is, of course, then a potentially important selective force favor-ing particular patterns of dispersal or indeed the tendency to dis-
perse at all. In particular, when closely related individuals breed,their offspring are likely to suffer an ‘inbreeding depression’ in ﬁtness (Charlesworth & Charlesworth, 1987), especially as aresult of the expression in the phenotype of recessive deleteriousalleles. With limited dispersal, inbreeding becomes more likely,
and inbreeding avoidance is thus a force favoring dispersal. Onthe other hand, many species show local adaptation to theirimmediate environment (see Section 1.2). Longer distance dispersalmay therefore bring together genotypes adapted to differentlocal environments, which on mating give rise to low-ﬁtness offspring adapted to neither habitat. This is called ‘outbreedingdepression’, resulting from the break-up of coadapted combina-tions of genes – a force acting against dispersal. The situation is
complicated by the fact that inbreeding depression is most likely
amongst populations that normally outbreed, since inbreeding itselfwill purge populations of their deleterious recessives. None theless, natural selection can be expected to favor a pattern of dispersal that is in some sense intermediate – maximizing ﬁtnessby avoiding both inbreeding and outbreeding depression, thoughthese will clearly be by no means the only selective forces actingon dispersal.
Certainly, there are several examples in plants of inbreeding
and outbreeding depression when pollen is transferred from
either close or distant donors, and in some cases both effects can be demonstrated in a single experiment. For example, whenlarkspur ( Delphinium nelsonii ) offspring were generated by hand
pollinating with pollen brought from 1, 3, 10 and 30 m to the receptor ﬂowers (Figure 6.9), both inbreeding and outbreedingdepression in ﬁtness were apparent.
6.6.2 Avoiding kin competition
In fact, inbreeding avoidance is not the only force likely to favornatal dispersal of offspring away from their close relatives. Such
•• ••
Overall fitness
10 10.00.40.7
3(c)
0.60.9
0.50.8
300.3
0.2
0.1Progeny size in third year of life
10 10104070
3
Crossing distance (m)(a)
3060
2050
30
Progeny lifespan (years)
10 1025
3(b)
14
3
30
Crossing distance (m) Crossing distance (m)
Figure 6.9 Inbreeding and outbreeding depression in Delphinium nelsonii : (a) progeny size in the third year of life, (b) progeny lifespan 
and (c) the overall ﬁtness of progeny cohorts were all lower when progeny were the result of crosses with pollen taken close to  (1 m) or
far from (30 m) the receptor plant. Bars show standard errors. (After Waser & Price, 1994.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 173174 CHAPTER 6
dispersal will also be favored because it decreases the likelihood
of competitive effects being directed at close kin. This wasexplained in a classic modeling paper by Hamilton and May(1977; see also Gandon & Michalakis, 2001), who demonstratedthat even in very stable habitats, all organisms will be under 
selective pressure to disperse some of their progeny. Imagine apopulation in which the majority of organisms have a stay-at-home,nondispersive genotype O, but in which a rare mutant genotype,X, keeps some offspring at home but commits others to dis-persal. The disperser X will suffer no competition in its own patchfrom O-type individuals but will compete against O-type individualsin their home patches. Disperser X will direct much of its com-petitive effects at non-kin (with genotype O), while O directs allof its competition at kin (also with genotype O). X will therefore
increase in frequency in the population. On the other hand, if the majority of the population are type X, whilst O is the raremutant, O will still do worse than X, since O can never displaceany of the Xs from their patches but has itself to contend withseveral or many dispersers in its own patch. Dispersal is there-fore said to be an evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS) (MaynardSmith, 1972; Parker, 1984). A population of nondispersers willevolve towards the ubiquitous possession of a dispersive tendency;but a population of dispersers will be under no selective pressureto lose that tendency. Hence, the avoidance of both inbreedingand kin competition seem likely to give rise to higher emigrationrates at higher densities, when these forces are most intense.
There is indeed evidence for kin competition playing a role
in driving offspring away from their natal habitat (Lambin et al. ,
2001), but much of it is indirect. For example, in the California
mouse, Peromyscus californicus , mean dispersal distance increased
with increasing litter size in males and, in females, with increas-ing numbers of sisters in the litter (Ribble, 1992). The more kina young individual was surrounded by, the further it dispersed.
Lambin et al. (2001) concluded in their review, though, that
whereas there is plentiful evidence for density-dependent emigration(see Section 6.3.3), there is little evidence for density-dependent‘effective’ dispersal (emigration, transfer and immigration), in
part at least because immigration (and perhaps transfer) may beinhibited at high densities. For example, in a study of kangaroorats, Dipodomys spectabilis , over several years during which 
density varied, dispersal was monitored ﬁrst after juveniles hadbecome independent of their parents, but then again after theyhad survived to breed themselves. The kangaroo rats occupy complex burrow systems containing food reserves, and theseremain more or less constant in number: high densities thereforemean a saturated environment and more intense competition( Jones et al. , 1988). At the time of juvenile independence, density
had no effect on dispersal (i.e. on emigration); but by ﬁrst breed-ing, dispersal rates (i.e. effective dispersal rates) were lower at
higher densities (inverse density dependence) (Figure 6.10). In males,this was mainly because they moved less between juvenile inde-pendence and breeding. In females, it occurred mainly becausetheir survival rate in new patches was lower at high densities ( Jones, 1988).
6.6.3 Philopatry
Effective dispersal is not straightforwardly density dependent at
least in part because there are also selective forces in favor of not
dispersing, but instead showing so-called philopatry or ‘home-loving’ behavior (Lambin et al. , 2001). This can come about
because there are advantages of inhabiting a familiar environment;
or individuals may cooperate with (or at least be prepared to tolerate) related individuals in the natal habitat that share a highproportion of their genes; or individuals that dodisperse may be
confronted with a ‘social fence’ of aggression or intolerance fromgroups of unrelated individuals (Hestbeck, 1982). These forces, too,
may become more intense as the environment becomes more saturated. Thus, for example, Lambin and Krebs (1993) found inTownsend’s voles, Microtus townsendii , in Canada, that the nests
or centers of activities of females that were ﬁrst degree relatives
(mother–daughters, littermate sisters) were closer than thosethat were second degree relatives (nonlittermate sisters, aunt–nieces), which were closer than those that were more distantlyrelated, which in turn were closer than those not related at all.
•• ••020
Dispersal distance
at first breeding (m)10Number of individuals
0
1–50
51–100
101–150
151–200
>200(b)020
10Number of individuals(a) Low density
020
10
0
1–50
51–100
101–150
151–200
>200020
10High density
Figure 6.10 Inverse density-dependent effective dispersal in the
kangaroo rat, Dipodomys spectabilis : (a) males, (b) females. Natal
dispersal distances were greater at low than at high densities.
(After Jones, 1988.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 174DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 175
And in a study of Belding’s ground squirrels, Spermophilus beldingi ,
even when females dispersed, they tended to settle near their 
sisters (Nunes et al. , 1997). Moreover, there are examples of ﬁt-
ness being higher when close kin are nearby. For instance, Lambinand Yoccoz (1998) manipulated the relatedness of groups of
breeding females of Townsend’s vole, mimicking either a situa-tion where the population had experienced philopatric recruitmentfollowed by high survival (‘high kinship’), or where the popula-tion had experienced either low philopatric recruitment or highmortality of recruits (‘low kinship’). Survival of pups, especiallyearly in their life, was signiﬁcantly higher in the high kinship thanin the low kinship treatment.
Overall, then, the relationship between dispersal and density
will depend, just like all other adaptations, on evolved comprom-
ises to conﬂicting forces, and also on which aspect of dispersal(emigration, effective dispersal, etc.) is the focus of attention. Itis no surprise either that, as we shall see below, the balance ofadvantage works out differently for different groups: males andfemales, old and young, and so on. Such variation also arguesagainst broad generalizations suggesting that dispersal is ‘typically’at presaturation densities (i.e. before resource limitation is intense)or for that matter at saturation densities (Lidicker, 1975).
6.7 Variation in dispersal within populations
6.7.1 Dispersal polymorphism
One source of variability in dispersal within populations is a
somatic polymorphism amongst the progeny of a single parent.This is typically associated with habitats that are variable orunpredictable. A classic example is the desert annual plantGymnarrhena micrantha . This bears very few (one to three) large
seeds (achenes) in ﬂowers that remain unopened below the soil surface, and these seeds germinate in the original site of the
parent. The root system of the seedling may even grow downthrough the dead parent’s root channel. But the same plants also
produce above-ground, smaller seeds with a feathery pappus, andthese are wind dispersed. In very dry years only the undispersedunderground seeds are produced, but in wetter years the plantsgrow vigorously and produce a large number of seeds aboveground, which are released to the haz-ards of dispersal (Koller & Roth, 1964).
There are very many examples of
such seed dimorphism amongst theﬂowering plants. Both the dispersed and the ‘stay at home’ seedswill, in their turn, produce both dispersed and ‘stay at home’progeny. Moreover, the ‘stay at home’ seed is often produced fromself-pollinated ﬂowers below ground or from unopened ﬂowers,whereas the seeds that are dispersed are more often the product
of cross-fertilization. Hence, the tendency to disperse is coupledwith the possession of new, recombinant (‘experimental’) geno-types, whereas the ‘stay at home’ progeny are more likely to bethe product of self-fertilization.
A dimorphism of dispersers and nondispersers is also a common
phenomenon amongst aphids (winged and wingless progeny). Asthis differentiation occurs during the phase of population growthwhen reproduction is parthenogenetic, the winged and winglessforms are genetically identical. The winged morphs are clearly
more capable of dispersing to new habitats, but they also oftenhave longer development times, lower fecundity, shorter lifespansand hence a reduced intrinsic rate of increase (Dixon, 1998). It isperhaps no surprise, therefore, that aphids may modify the pro-portions of winged and wingless morphs in immediate responseto the environments in which they ﬁnd themselves. The pea aphid,Acyrthosiphon pisum , for example, produces more winged morphs
in the presence of predators (Figure 6.11), presumably as an escape
response from an adverse environment.
•• ••080
Period 120% of winged offspring(a)
70
60
50
4030
10
Period 2080
Period 120(b)
70
60504030
10
Period 2dispersal
dimorphisms
Figure 6.11 The mean proportion 
(±SE) of winged morphs of the pea aphid,
Acyrthosiphon pisum , produced after two
separate periods of exposure to each of 
two predators: (a) hoverﬂy larvae and 
(b) lacewing larvae. Dark bars, predatortreatment; light bars, control. (After Kunert& Weisser, 2003.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 175176 CHAPTER 6
6.7.2 Sex-related differences
Males and females often differ in their liability to disperse.
Differences are especially strong in some insects, where it is themale that is usually the more active disperser. For example, inthe winter moth ( Operophtera brumata ), the female is wingless whilst
the male is free-ﬂying. In a seminal paper, Greenwood (1980) con-
trasted the sex-biased dispersal of birds and mammals. Amongstbirds it is usually the females that are the main dispersers, butamongst mammals it is usually the males. Evolutionary explana-tions for a sex bias have emphasized on the one hand the advant-ages of a sex bias in its own right as a means of minimizing inbreeding, but also that details of the mating system may gen-erate asymmetries in the costs and beneﬁts of dispersal andphilopatry in the two sexes (Lambin et al. , 2001). Thus, in birds,
competition for territories is typically most intense amongst
males. They, therefore, have most to gain from philopatry in termsof being familiar with their natal habitat, whereas the dispersing(and often monogamous) females may gain from exercising a choice of mate amongst the males. In mammals, the (oftenpolygamous) males may compete more often for mates than for territories, and they therefore have most to gain by dispersing toareas with the largest number of defensible females.
6.7.3 Age-related differences
Much dispersal is natal dispersal, i.e. dispersal by juveniles before
they reproduce for the ﬁrst time. In many taxa this is constitu-tional: we have already noted that seed dispersal in plants is, byits nature, natal dispersal. Likewise, many marine invertebrateshave a sessile adult (reproductive) stage and rely on their larvae
(obviously pre-reproductive) for dispersal. On the other hand, most insects have a sessile larval stage and rely on the reproductiveadults for dispersal. Here, for iteroparous species, dispersal is mostoften something that occurs throughout the adult life, before and after the ﬁrst breeding episode; but for semelparous species,dispersal once again is almost inevitably natal.
Birds and mammals, once they have ﬂedged or been weaned
and are independent of their mothers, also have the potential todisperse throughout the rest of their lives. None the less, most
dispersal here, too, is natal (Wolff, 1997). Indeed, age-biases and sex-biases in dispersal, and the forces of inbreeding-avoidance,competition-avoidance and philopatry, are all tied intimatelytogether in the patterns of dispersal observed in mammals. Thus,for example, in an experiment with gray-tailed voles, Microtus 
canicaudus , 87% of juvenile males and 34% of juvenile females 
dispersed within 4 weeks of initial capture at low densities, butonly 16% and 12%, respectively, dispersed at high densities (Wolffet al. , 1997). There was massive juvenile dispersal, which was 
particularly pronounced in the males; and the inverse density dependence, and especially the very high rates at low densities,argue in favor of inbreeding-avoidance as a major force shaping
the pattern.
6.8 The demographic signiﬁcance of dispersal
The ecological fact of life identiﬁed in Section 4.1 emphasized 
that dispersal can have a potentially profound effect on thedynamics of populations. In practice, however, many studieshave paid little attention to dispersal. The reason often given isthat emigration and immigration are approximately equal, and 
they therefore cancel one another out. One suspects, though, thatthe real reason is that dispersal is usually extremely difﬁcult to quantify.
The nature of the role of dispersal
in population dynamics depends onhow we think of populations. The simplest view sees a population as a collection of individuals distributed more or less continuously overa stretch of more or less suitable habitat, such that the popula-
tion is a single, undivided entity. Dispersal is then a process contributing to either the increase (immigration) or decrease(emigration) in the population. Many populations, however, arein fact meta populations; that is, collections of subpopulations.
We noted in Section 6.3.1 the ubiquity of patchiness in eco-
logy and the importance of dispersal in linking patches to oneanother. A subpopulation, then, occupies a habitable patch in the landscape, and it corresponds, in isolation, to the simple view of a population described above. But the dynamics of themetapopulation as a whole is determined in large part by the rate of extinction of individual subpopulations, and the rate of colonization – by dispersal – of habitable but uninhabitedpatches. Note, however, that just because a species occupies
more than one habitable site, each of which supports a popula-tion, this does not mean that those populations comprise ametapopulation. As we shall discuss more fully below, ‘classic’metapopulation status is conferred only when extinction andrecolonization play a major role in the overall dynamics.
6.8.1 Modeling dispersal: the distribution of patches
The ways in which dispersal intervenes in the dynamics of 
populations can be envisaged, or indeed modeled mathematically,in three different ways (see Kareiva, 1990; Keeling, 1999). The ﬁrstis an ‘island’ or ‘spatially implicit’ approach (Hanski & Simberloff,1997; Hanski, 1999). Here, the key feature is that a proportion 
of the individuals leave their home patches and enter a pool ofdispersers and are then redistributed amongst patches, usually atrandom. Thus, these models do not place patches at any speciﬁcspatial location. All patches may lose or gain individuals throughdispersal, but all are, in a sense, equally distant from all other
•• ••metapopulations and
subpopulationsEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 176DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 177
patches. Many metapopulation models, including the earliest
(Levins’ model, see below), come into this category, and despitetheir simplicity (real patches dohave a location in space) they have
provided important insights, in part because their simplicitymakes them easier to analyze.
In contrast, spatially explicit models acknowledge that the 
distances between patches vary, as do therefore the chances of
them exchanging individuals through dispersal. The earliest suchmodels, developed in population genetics, were linear ‘steppingstones’, where dispersal occurred only between adjacent patchesin the line (Kimura & Weiss, 1964). More recently, spatiallyexplicit approaches have often involved ‘lattice’ models in whichpatches are arranged on a (usually) square grid, and patches exchange dispersing individuals with ‘neighboring’ patches – 
perhaps the four with which they share a side, or the eight with which they make any contact at all, including the diagonals(Keeling, 1999). Of course, despite being spatially explicit, suchmodels are still caricatures of patch arrangements in the real world.They are none the less useful in highlighting new dynamic patternsthat appear as soon as space is incorporated explicitly: not onlyspatial patterns (see, for example, Section 10.5.6), but also alteredtemporal dynamics, including, for example, the increased prob-ability of extinction of whole spatially explicit metapopulations as habitat is destroyed (Figure 6.12). Further spatially explicit models are also spatially ‘realistic’ (see Hanski, 1999) in that theyinclude information about the actual geometry of fragmented landscapes. One of these, the ‘incidence function model’ (Hanski,
1994b), is utilized below (Section 6.9.4).
Finally, the third approach treats space not as patchy at all but
as continuous and homogeneous, and usually models dispersal aspart of a reaction–diffusion system, where the dynamics at anygiven location in space are captured by the ‘reaction’, and dispersalis added as separate ‘diffusion’ terms. The approach has been moreuseful in other areas of biology (e.g. developmental biology)than it has in ecology. None the less, the mathematical under-standing of such systems is strong, and they are particularly good at demonstrating how spatial variation (i.e. patchiness) canbe generated, internally, within an intrinsically homogeneoussystem (Kareiva, 1990; Keeling, 1999).
6.8.2 Dispersal and the demography of single
populations
The studies that have looked carefully at dispersal have tended to
bear out its importance. In a long-term and intensive investiga-
tion of a population of great tits, Parus major , near Oxford, UK,
it was observed that 57% of breeding birds were immigrants ratherthan born in the population (Greenwood et al. , 1978). In a pop-
ulation of the Colorado potato beetle, Leptinotarsa decemlineata ,
in Canada, the average emigration rate of newly emerged adults
was 97% (Harcourt, 1971). This makes the rapid spread of the beetle in Europe in the middle of the last century easy to under-
stand (Figure 6.13).
A profound effect of dispersal on the dynamics of a popula-
tion was seen in a study of Cakile edentula , a summer annual plant
growing on the sand dunes of Martinique Bay, Nova Scotia. Thepopulation was concentrated in the middle of the dunes, anddeclined towards both the sea and the land. Only in the area
towards the sea, however, was seed production high enough and
mortality sufﬁciently low for the population to maintain itself yearafter year. At the middle and landward sites, mortality exceededseed production. Hence, one might have expected the population
•• ••00.00.8
Habitat destroyed ( D)1.0 0.40.4Sites occupied (V *)
0.8 0.2 0.60.20.6
Figure 6.12 In a series of models, as an increasing fraction of
habitat is destroyed (left to right on the x-axis), the fraction of
available sites occupied ( y-axis) declines until the whole population
is effectively extinct (no sites occupied). The diagonal dotted line
shows the relationship for a spatially implicit model in which all
sites are equally connected. The dots show output from a spatiallyexplicit lattice model: values are the means of ﬁve replicates (the model is probabilistic: each run is slightly different). Threeexamples of the lattice are shown below, with 0.05. 0.40 and 0.70of the patches destroyed (black). With little habitat destruction(towards the left), an explicit spatial structure makes negligibledifference as the remaining patches are well connected to otherpatches. But with more habitat destruction, patches in the latticebecome increasingly isolated and unlikely to be recolonized, and
many more of them remain unoccupied than in the spatiallyimplicit model. (After Bascompte & Sole, 1996.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 177••178 CHAPTER 6
to become extinct (Figure 6.14). But the distribution of Cakile did
not change over time. Instead, large numbers of seeds from the
seaward zone dispersed to the middle and landward zones.Indeed, more seeds were dispersed into and germinated in thesetwo zones than were produced by the residents. The distribution
and abundance of Cakile were directly due to the dispersal of seeds
in the wind and the waves.
Probably the most fundamental consequence of dispersal for
the dynamics of single populations, though, is the regulatory effectof density-dependent emigration (see Section 6.3.3). Locally, allthat was said in Chapter 5 regarding density-dependent mor-tality applies equally to density-dependent emigration. Globally, of course, the consequences of the two may be quite different.Those that die are lost forever and from everywhere. With 
emigration, one population’s loss may be another’s gain.
6.8.3 Invasion dynamics
In almost every aspect of life, there 
is a danger in imagining that what isusual and ‘normal’ is in fact universal,
and that what is unusual or eccentric can safely be dismissed orignored. Every statistical distribution has a tail, however, and those
that occupy the tail are as real as the conformists that outnum-ber them. So it is with dispersal. For many purposes, it is reasonableto characterize dispersal rates and distances in terms of what istypical. But especially when the focus is on the spread of aspecies into a habitat that it has previously not been occupied,those propagules dispersing furthest may be of the greatest
importance. Neubert and Caswell (2000), for example, analyzedthe rate of spread of two species of plants, Calathea ovandensis
and Dipsacus sylvestris . In both cases they found that the rate of
spread was strongly dependent on the maximum dispersal distance,whereas variations in the pattern of dispersal at lesser distanceshad little effect.
This dependence of invasion on rare long-distance dispersers
means, in turn, that the probability of a species invading a newhabitat may have far more to do with the proximity of a source
population (and hence the opportunity to invade) than it does onthe performance of the species once an initial bridgehead has beenestablished. For instance, the invasion of 116 patches of lowlandheath vegetation in southern England by scrub and tree specieswas studied for the period from 1978 to 1987 (Figure 6.15) andalso from 1987 to 1996 (Nolan et al., 1998; Bullock et al., 2002). There
were four types of heath – dry, humid, wet and mire – and with
••1922
1930
1935
19451952
1960
1964
Figure 6.13 Spread of the Colorado
beetle ( Leptinotarsa decemlineata ) in Europe.
(After Johnson, 1967.)
the importance of
eccentric dispersersEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 178••DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 179
••death and
emigration
birthdeath
birth and
immigration
birthbirth and
immigration
birthdeathRates
N*
(N*, where                        = death)N* DensitySeaward Middle Landward
death and
emigration{ {birth and
immigration{ {N*
(N*, where birth =                     )
Expected without
seed migration With landward
seed migration—actual pattern ofdensity observedDensity
Seaward Middle LandwardDensity Density
Figure 6.14 Diagrammatic representation of variations in mortality and seed production of Cakile edentula in three areas along an
environmental gradient from open sand beach (seaward) to densely vegetated dunes (landward). In contrast to other areas, seed
production was proliﬁc at the seaward site. Births, however, declined with plant density, and where births and deaths were equa l, an
equilibrium population density can be envisaged, N*. In the middle and landward sites, deaths always exceeded births resulting from local
seeds, but populations persisted there because of the landward drift of the majority of seed produced by plants on the beach (s eaward site).
Thus, the sum of local births plus immigrating seeds can balance mortality in the middle and landward sites, resulting in equil ibria at
appropriate densities. (After Keddy, 1982; Watkinson, 1984.)
0 5 10 kmSeaNDecrease
No changeIncreaseChange in cover of scrub and
tree species in a heathland patch
Figure 6.15 The invasion (i.e. increase in
abundance) of most of the 116 patches of
lowland heath in Dorset, UK, by scrub and tree species between 1978 and 1987.Coastland is to the south and the county
boundary to the east. (After Bullock et al. ,
2002.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 179180 CHAPTER 6
two periods, eight data sets on which an analysis could be carried
out. For six of these, a signiﬁcant proportion of the variation inthe loss of heath to invading species could be accounted for. Themost important explanatory variables were those describing theabundance of scrub and tree species in the vegetation bordering
the heath patches. Invasions, and thus the subsequent dynamicsof patches, were being driven by initiating acts of dispersal.
6.9 Dispersal and the demography of
metapopulations
6.9.1 The development of metapopulation theory:
uninhabited habitable patches
Recognition that many populations are in fact metapopulations
was ﬁrmly established around 1970, but there was a delay of around20 years before that recognition was translated into action andan increasing number of studies placed metapopulation dynamicsprominently on the ecological stage. Now, the danger is not so
much one of neglect, but that all populations are thought of asmetapopulations, simply because the world is patchy.
Central to the concept of a metapopulation is the idea,
emphasized by Andrewartha and Birch back in 1954, that habit-able patches might be uninhabited simply because individuals havefailed to disperse into them. To establish that this is so, we needto be able to identify habitable sites that are not inhabited. Onlyvery rarely has this been attempted. One method involves identifying characteristics of habitat patches to which a species is
restricted and then determining the distribution and abundanceof similar patches in which the species might be expected to occur.The water vole ( Arvicola terrestris ) lives in river banks, and in a
survey of 39 sections of river bank in North Yorkshire, UK, 10contained breeding colonies of voles (core sites), 15 were visitedby voles but they did not breed there (peripheral sites) and 14were apparently never used or visited. A ‘principle component’ ana-
lysis was used to characterize the core sites, and on the basis of
these characteristics a further 12 unoccupied or peripheral siteswere identiﬁed that should have been suitable for breeding voles(i.e. habitable sites). Apparently, about 30% of habitable sites wereuninhabited by voles because they were too isolated to be colo-nized or in some cases suffered high levels of predation by mink
(Lawton & Woodroffe, 1991).
Habitable patches can also be identiﬁed for a number of rare
butterﬂy species because the larvae feed on only one or a fewpatchily distributed plant species. Thomas et al. (1992) found that
the patches that remained uninhabited were small and isolatedfrom the sources of dispersal: the butterﬂy Phlebejus argus was 
able to colonize virtually all habitable sites less than 1 km from existing populations. Indeed, the habitability of some of the isolated (previously uninhabited) sites was established whenthe butterﬂy was successfully introduced (Thomas & Harrison,1992). This is the crucial test of whether a site is really habitable
or not.
6.9.2 The development of metapopulation theory:
islands and metapopulations
The classic book, The Theory of Island Biogeography by MacArthur
and Wilson (1967), was an important catalyst in radically changing
ecological theory in general. The authors developed their ideasin the context of the dynamics of the animals and plants on real(maritime) islands, which they interpreted as reﬂecting a balance
between the opposing forces of extinctions and colonizations. Theyemphasized that some species (or local populations) spend mostof their time either recovering from past crashes or in phases ofinvasion of new territories (islands), while others spend much oftheir time at or around their carrying capacity. These two endsof a continuum are the r- and K-species of Section 4.12. At one
extreme ( r-species), individuals are good colonizers and have
characteristics favoring rapid population growth in an empty habitat. At the other end of the continuum ( K-species) indi-
viduals are not such good colonizers but have characteristics
favoring long-term persistence in a crowded environment. K-species therefore have relatively low rates of both colonization
and extinction, whereas r-species have relatively high rates.
These ideas are developed further in the discussion of island biogeography in Chapter 21.
At about the same time as MacArthur and Wilson’s book was
published, a simple model of ‘metapopulation’ dynamics wasproposed by Levins (1969, 1970). Like MacArthur and Wilson, hesought to incorporate into ecological thinking the essentialpatchiness of the world around us. MacArthur and Wilson weremore concerned with whole communities of species, and envisageda ‘mainland’ that could provide a regular source of colonists for
the islands. Levins focused on populations of a single species andawarded none of his patches special mainland status. Levinsintroduced the variable p(t), the fraction of habitat patches occu-
pied at time t, reﬂecting an acceptance that not all habitable patches
are always inhabited.
The rate of change in the fraction of
occupied habitat (patches, p) is given in
Levins’ model as:
dp/dt=mp(1−p)−µp, (6.1)
in which µis the rate of local extinction of patches and mis the
rate of recolonization of empty patches. That is, the rate of recolonizations increases both with the fraction of emptypatches prone to recolonization (1 −p) and with the fraction of
occupied patches able to provide colonizers, p, whereas the rate
of extinctions increases simply with the fraction of patches proneto extinction, p.Rewriting this equation, Hanski (1994a) showed
•• ••Levins’ modelEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 180DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 181
that it is structurally identical to the logistic equation (see
Section 5.9):
dp/dt=(m−µ) p{1−p/[1−(m/µ)]}. (6.2)
Hence, as long as the intrinsic rate of recolonization exceeds the
intrinsic rate of extinction (( m−µ) >0), the total metapopulation
will reach a stable equilibrium, with a fraction, 1 −(µ/m), of the
patches occupied.
The most fundamental message
from taking a metapopulation perspect-ive, then, which emerges from even the simplest models, is that a meta-
population can persist, stably, as aresult of the balance between random
extinctions and recolonizations even though none of the local populations are stable in their own right. An example of this isshown in Figure 6.16, where within a persistent, highly frag-mented metapopulation of the Glanville fritillary butterﬂy(Melitaea cinxia ) in Finland, even the largest local populations 
had a high probability of declining to extinction within 2 years.To re-state the message another way: if we wish to understand thelong-term persistence of a population, or indeed that population’sdynamics, then we may need to look beyond the local rates of birth and death (and what determines them), or even the local rates of immigration and emigration. If the population as 
a whole functions as a metapopulation, then the rates of subpopulation extinction and colonization may be of at least comparable importance.6.9.3 When is a population a metapopulation?
Two necessary features of a metapopulation have already been
established here: that individual subpopulations have a realisticchance of experiencing both extinction and recolonization. To 
this we can add a third, which has been implicit in the discussionthus far. The dynamics of the various subpopulations should be
largely independent, i.e. not synchronous. There would, after all,be little hope of stability if when one subpopulation went extinctthey all did. Rather, asynchrony guarantees that as one goesextinct (or even declines), there are likely to be others that arethriving and generating dispersers, promoting the ‘rescue effect’(Brown & Kodric-Brown, 1977) of the former by the latter.
Some metapopulations may con-
form to the ‘classic’ concept, in whichall the subpopulations have a realistic
(and roughly equal) chance of extinction, but in other cases there may be signiﬁcant variation in either the size or quality ofindividual patches. Thus, patches may be divided into ‘sources’(donor patches) and ‘sinks’ (receiver patches) (Pulliam, 1988). Insource patches at equilibrium, the number of births exceeds thenumber of deaths, whereas in sink patches the reverse is true.Hence, source populations support one or more sink populationswithin a metapopulation. The persistence of the metapopulationdepends not only on the overall balance between extinction andrecolonization, as in the simple model, but also on the balancebetween sources and sinks.
In practice, of course, there is likely to be a continuum of types
of metapopulation: from collections of nearly identical local pop-
ulations, all equally prone to extinction, to metapopulations inwhich there is great inequality between local populations, someof which are effectively stable in their own right. This contrast isillustrated in Figure 6.17 for the silver-studded blue butterﬂy(Plejebus argus ) in North Wales.
Just because a population is patchily distributed, however, this
does not necessarily make it a metapopulation (Harrison &Taylor, 1997; Bullock et al., 2002). First, a population may be patchily
distributed, but dispersal between the patches may be so greatthat the dynamics of the individual patches are no longer inde-pendent: a single population, albeit occupying a heterogeneoushabitat. Alternatively, patches may be so isolated from oneanother that dispersal between them is negligible: a series of effectively separate populations.
Finally, and perhaps most commonly, all patches may simply
have a negligible chance of extinction, at least on observabletimescales. This means that their dynamics may be inﬂuenced by birth, death, immigration and emigration – but not to anysigniﬁcant degree by extinction or recolonization. This last category comes closest to being a true metapopulation, andthere can be little doubt that the title has been given to manypatchy populations ﬁtting this description. Of course, there canbe a danger in being overprotective of the purity of deﬁnitions.
•• ••extinctions and
colonizations insubpopulations: a stable metapopulation
Log population size in 1993
4 3 1–1–1124
2
Log population size in 199103
052 2 2
Figure 6.16 Comparison of the local population sizes in June
1991 (adults) and August 1993 (larvae) of the Glanville fritillary
butterﬂy ( Melitaea cinxia ) on Åland island in Finland. Multiple data
points are indicated by numbers. Many 1991 populations, includingmany of the largest, had become extinct by 1993. (After Hanski 
et al. , 1995.)sources and sinksEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 181•• ••182 CHAPTER 6
What harm can there be if, as interest in the metapopulation 
concept grows, the term itself is extended to a wider variety of ecological scenarios? Perhaps none – and the spread of the term’s usage to populations originally beyond its reach may, inany case, be unstoppable. But a word, like any other signal, is only
effective if the receiver understands what the sender intends. At the very least, care should be taken by users of the term toconﬁrm whether the extinction and recolonization of patches has been established.
The problem of identifying meta-
populations is especially apparent for plants (Husband & Barrett, 1996;Bullock et al. , 2002). There is no doubt
that many plants inhabit patchy envi-
ronments, and apparent extinctions of local populations may be
common. This is shown in Figure 6.18 for the annual aquatic plantEichhornia paniculata , living in temporary ponds and ditches in arid
regions in northeast Brazil. However, the applicability of the ideaof recolonization following a genuine extinction is questionablein any plant species that has a buried seed bank. In E. paniculata ,
for instance, the heavy seeds almost always drop in the immedi-ate vicinity of the parent rather than being dispersed to otherpatches. ‘Extinctions’ are typically the result of the catastrophicloss of habitat (note in Figure 6.18 that the chance of extinctionhas effectively nothing to do with the previous population size) and ‘recolonizations’ are almost always simply the result of thegermination of seeds following habitat restoration. Recolon-1 km(a)
1973 ccc
e
e c
ccce
ee(b)
c
e
e
e
eec
c
cc
e
eccc
cc
c
c
cc
1 km
Figure 6.17 Two metapopulations of the silver-studded blue butterﬂy ( Plejebus argus ) in North Wales: (a) in a limestone habitat in the
Dulas Valley, where there was a large number of persistent (often larger) local populations amongst smaller, much more ephemera l local
populations; (b) in a heathland habitat at South Stack Cliffs, where the proportion of smaller and ephemeral populations was mu ch greater.
Filled outlines, present in both 1983 and 1990; open outlines, not present at both times; e, present only in 1983 (presumed ext inction); 
c, present only in 1990 (presumed colonization). (After Thomas & Harrison, 1992.)
0130
Population size4096 1610% of populations
256 46 420
1024metapopulations of
plants? rememberthe seed bank
Figure 6.18 Of 123 populations of the annual aquatic plant
Eichhornia paniculata in northeast Brazil observed over a 1-year
time interval, 39% went extinct, but the mean initial size of those
that went extinct (dark bars) was not signiﬁcantly different fromthose that did not (pale bars). (Mann-Whitney U =1925, P>0.3.)
(After Husband & Barrett, 1996.)
ization by dispersal, a prerequisite for a true metapopulation, is
extremely rare.
Moreover, as Bullock et al. (2002) point out, of the plant 
studies that have documented patch extinctions and colonizations,EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 182••DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 183
the vast majority have been in recently emerged patches (the 
early stages of succession, see Chapter 16). Extinctions mostly occur when the vegetation in a patch develops to a state whereit is no longer suitable for the plant species in question, and that patch is therefore also not suitable for recolonization by the
same species. This is ‘habitat tracking’ (Harrison & Taylor, 1997)rather than the repeated extinction and recolonization of the samehabitat that is central to the concept of a metapopulation.
6.9.4 Metapopulation dynamics
Levins’ simple model does not take into account the variation 
in size of patches, their spatial locations, nor the dynamics of populations within individual patches. Not surprisingly, modelsthat do take all these highly relevant variables into accountbecome mathematically complex (Hanski, 1999). Nevertheless, the
nature and consequences of some of these modiﬁcations can beunderstood without going into the details of the mathematics.
For example, imagine that the habitat patches occupied by a
metapopulation vary in size and that large patches support largerlocal populations. This allows persistence of the metapopulation,with lower rates of colonization than would otherwise be the case, as a result of the lowered rates of extinction on the largerpatches (Hanski & Gyllenberg, 1993). Indeed, the greater the variation in patch size, the more likely it is that the metapopula-
tion will persist, other things being equal. Variations in the sizeof local populations may, alternatively, be the result of variationsin patch quality rather than patch size: the consequences wouldbe broadly the same.
The probability of extinction of local populations typically
declines as local population size increases (Hanski, 1991). More-over, as the fraction of patches occupied by the metapopulation,p, increases, there should on average be more migrants, more 
immigration into patches, and hence larger local populations(conﬁrmed, for example, for the Glanville fritillary – Hanski et al. ,
1995) .Thus, the extinction rate, µ, should arguably not be 
constant as it is in the simple model, but should decline as p
increases. Models incorporating this effect (Hanski, 1991; Hanski
& Gyllenberg, 1993) often give rise to an intermediate unstablethreshold value of p.Above the threshold, the sizes of local 
populations are sufﬁciently large, and their rate of extinctionsufﬁciently low, for the metapopulation to persist at a relativelyhigh fraction of patches, as in the simple model. Below thethreshold, however, the average size of local populations is too low and their rate of extinction hence too high. The meta-population declines either to an alternative stable equilibrium at p=0 (extinction of the whole metapopulation) or to one in 
which pis low, where essentially only
the most favorable patches are occupied.
Different metapopulations of the
same species might therefore beexpected to occupy either a high or a low fraction of their 
habitable patches (the alternative stable equilibria) but not an intermediate fraction (close to the threshold). Such a bimodal 
distribution is indeed apparent for the Glanville fritillary inFinland (Figure 6.19). In addition, these alternative equilibriahave potentially profound implications for conservation (seeChapter 15), especially when the lower equilibrium occurs at p=0, suggesting that the threat of extinction for any metapopu-
lation may increase or decline quite suddenly as the fraction of habitable patches occupied moves below or above some thresh-old value.
One study drawing many of the preceding threads together
examined the dynamics of a presumed metapopulation of a smallmammal, the American pika Ochotona princeps , in California
(Moilanen et al. , 1998). (The qualiﬁer ‘presumed’ is necessary
because dispersal between habitat patches was itself presumed
rather than actually observed (see Clinchy et al. , 2002).) The
overall metapopulation could itself be divided into northern,middle and southern networks, and the patch occupancy in eachwas determined on four occasions between 1972 and 1991(Figure 6.20a). These purely spatial data were used alongside more general information on pika biology, to provide parametervalues for Hanski’s (1994b) incidence function model (see Sec-tion 6.8.1). This was then used to simulate the overall dynamicsof each of the networks, with a realistic degree of stochastic variation incorporated, starting from the observed situation in 1972 and either treating the entire metapopulation as a single entity (Figure 6.20b) or simulating each of the networks in isolation (Figure 6.20c).
••alternative stable
equilibria?
Frequency
00248
Fraction of patches occupied, p7
56
3
1
1
Figure 6.19 The bimodal frequency distribution of patch
occupancy (proportion of habitable patches occupied, p) amongst
different metapopulations of the Glanville fritillary ( Melitaea cinxia )
on Åland island in Finland. (After Hanski et al. , 1995.)EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 183184 CHAPTER 6
The data themselves (Figure 6.20a) show that the northern net-
work maintained a high occupancy throughout the study period,
the middle network maintained a more variable and much loweroccupancy, while the southern network suffered a steady and sub-stantial decline. The output from the incidence function model
(Figure 6.20b) was very encouraging in mirroring accuratelythese patterns in temporal dynamics despite being based only onspatial data. In particular, the southern network was predicted tocollapse periodically to overall extinction but to be rescued by themiddle network acting, despite its low occupancy, as a steppingstone from the much more buoyant northern network. Thisinterpretation is supported by the results when the three networksare simulated in isolation (Figure 6.20c). The northern networkremains at a stable high occupancy; but the middle network, starved
of migrants from the north, rapidly and predictably crashes; andthe southern network, while not so unstable, eventually suffersthe same fate. On this view, then, within the metapopulation asa whole, the northern network is a source and the middle andsouthern networks are sinks. Thus, there is no need to invokeany environmental change to explain the decline in the southernnetwork; such declines are predicted even in an unchangingenvironment.Even more fundamentally, these results illustrate how whole
metapopulations can be stable when their individual subpopula-
tions are not. Moreover, the comparison of the northern and middle networks, both stable but at very different occupancies,shows how occupancy may depend on the size of the pool of 
dispersers, which itself may depend on the size and number ofthe subpopulations.
Finally, these simulations direct us
to a theme that recurs throughout thisbook. Simple models (and one’s ownﬁrst thoughts) often focus on equilibria attained in the longterm. But in practice such equilibria may rarely be reached. Inthe present case, stable equilibria can readily be generated in simple metapopulation models, but the observable dynamics of
a species may often have more to do with the ‘transient’ behaviorof its metapopulations, far from equilibrium. To take another ex-ample, the silver-spotted skipper butterﬂy ( Hesperia comma ) declined
steadily in Great Britain from a widespread distribution overmost calcareous hills in 1900, to 46 or fewer refuge localities (localpopulations) in 10 regions by the early 1960s (Thomas & Jones,1993). The probable reasons were changes in land use – increasedploughing of unimproved grasslands and reduced stocking with
•• ••
00 1000 1500 2000 3000 2500 5004500(a) (b) (c)
Distance (m)4000
3000
200010003500
2500
1500
500Distance (m)
0 400 600 800 1000 200South
Time (years)0 400 600 800 1000 200
Time (years)0.01977 1989 1991 19721.0
0.6
0.40.8
0.20.01977 1989 1991 19721.0
0.6
0.40.8
0.20.01977 1989 1991 19721.0
0.6
0.40.8
0.2
0.0P1.0
0.6
0.40.8
0.2Middle
0.0P PP
P1.0
0.6
0.40.8
0.2North
SouthMiddleNorth
0.0P1.0
0.6
0.40.8
0.2
Northern
patch network
Middle
patch network
Southern
patch networkP
P
P
Figure 6.20 The metapopulation dynamics of the American pika, Ochotona princeps , in Bodie, California. (a) The relative positions and
approximate sizes of the habitable patches, and the occupancies in the northern, middle and southern networks of patches in 197 2, 1977,
1989 and 1991. (b) The temporal dynamics of the three networks, with the entire metapopulation treated as a single entity, usin g Hanski’s
(1994b) incidence function model. Ten replicate simulations are shown, each starting with the actual data in 1972. (c) Equivale nt
simulations to (b) but with each of the networks simulated in isolation. (After Moilanen et al. , 1998.)
equilibria may rarely
be reachedEIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 184DISPERSAL, DORMANCY AND METAPOPULATIONS 185
domestic grazing animals – and the virtual elimination of rab-
bits by myxomatosis with its consequent profound vegetationalchanges. Throughout this nonequilibrium period, rates of localextinction generally exceeded those of recolonization. In the1970s and 1980s, however, the reintroduction of livestock and 
the recovery of the rabbits led to increased grazing and the number of suitable habitats increased again. Recolonizationexceeded local extinction – but the spread of the skipperremained slow, especially into localities isolated from the 1960srefugia. Even in southeast England, where the density of refugiawas greatest, it is predicted that the abundance of the butterﬂywill increase only slowly – and remain far from equilibrium – forat least 100 years.
Summary
We distinguish between dispersal and migration, and within 
dispersal between emigration, transfer and immigration.
Various categories of active and passive dispersal are
described, including especially passive dispersal in the seed rainand the guerrilla and phalanx strategies of clonal dispersers.
Random, regular and aggregated distributions are explained,
and the importance of scale and patchiness in the perception 
of such distributions is emphasized, especially in the context of environmental ‘grain’. Forces favoring and diluting aggrega-tions are elaborated, including the theory of the selﬁsh herd anddensity-dependent dispersal.
We describe some of the main patterns of migration at a range
of scales – tidal, diurnal, seasonal and intercontinental – includingthose that recur repeatedly and those that occur just once.
We examine dormancy as migration in time in both animals
(especially diapause) and plants. The importance of photoperiod
in the timing of dormancy is emphasized.The relationship between dispersal and density is examined 
in detail. The roles of in- and outbreeding in driving density dependences are explained, including especially the importanceof avoiding kin competition on the one hand and the attractionsof philopatry on the other.
We describe a variety of types of variation in dispersal within
populations: polymorphisms and sex- and age-related differences.
We turn to the demographic signiﬁcance of dispersal and
introduce the concept of the metapopulation composed of a
number of subpopulations. Dispersal can be incorporated into the dynamics of populations, and modeled, in three different ways: (i) an ‘island’ or ‘spatially implicit’ approach; (ii) a spatiallyexplicit approach that acknowledges that the distances betweenpatches vary; and (iii) an approach treating space as continuous
and homogeneous.
Probably the most fundamental consequence of dispersal 
for the dynamics of single populations is the regulatory effect of density-dependent emigration. It is important also, though, torecognize the importance of rare long-distance dispersers in invasion dynamics.
Metapopulation theory developed from the earlier concept 
of the uninhabited habitable patch. Its origin as a concept in its
own right was the Levins’ model, which established the most fundamental message: that a metapopulation can persist, stably,as a result of the balance between random extinctions and recolon-izations, even though no subpopulations are stable in their ownright.
Not all patchily distributed populations are metapopulations,
so we address the question ‘When is a population a meta-population?’, which may be particularly problematic with plant populations.
Finally, we explore the dynamics of metapopulations, em-
phasizing especially the likely importance of alternative stable 
equilibria.
•• ••EIPC06  10/24/05  1:55 PM  Page 185••7.1 Introduction
The expanding human population
(Figure 7.1) has created a wide varietyof environmental problems. Our speciesis not unique in depleting and con-taminating the environment but we
are certainly unique in using ﬁre, fossil
fuels and nuclear ﬁssion to provide the energy to do work. Thispower generation has had far-reaching consequences for thestate of the land, aquatic ecosystems and the atmosphere, withdramatic repercussions for global climate (see Chapter 2). More-
over, the energy generated has provided people with the powerto transform landscapes (and waterscapes) through urbanization,industrial agriculture, forestry, ﬁshing and mining. We have polluted land and water, destroyed large areas of almost all kindsof natural habitat, overexploited living resources, transportedorganisms around the world with negative consequences for
native ecosystems, and driven a multitude of species close to 
extinction.
An understanding of the scope of 
the problems facing us, and the meansto counter and solve these problems,depends absolutely on a proper grasp ofecological fundamentals. In the ﬁrstsection of this book we have dealt with the ecology of individual
organisms, and of populations of organisms of single species(population interactions will be the subject of the second section).Here we switch attention to how this knowledge can be turnedto advantage by resource managers. At the end of the second andthird sections of the book we will address, in a similar manner,the application of ecological knowledge at the level of populationinteractions (Chapter 15) and then of communities and ecosys-tems (Chapter 22).
Individual organisms have a physi-
ology that ﬁts them to tolerate partic-ular ranges of physicochemical conditions and dictates their needfor speciﬁc resources (see Chapters 2 and 3). The occurrence anddistribution of species therefore depends fundamentally on theirphysiological ecology and, for animals, their behavioral repertoire
too. These facts of ecological life are encapsulated in the conceptof the niche (see Chapter 2). We have observed that species do not occur everywhere that conditions and resources areAnnual increments (millions)
2050 1900 1800 17506080100
1850
Year40
20
Population size (billions)10
1950 20008
64
2Population increment
Population
sizeenvironmental
problems resultingfrom humanpopulation growth . . .
Figure 7.1 Growth in size of the world’s human population since
1750 and predicted growth until 2050 (solid line). The histograms
represent decadal population increments. (After United Nations,1999.). . . require 
the application of ecological knowledge, . . .
...n i c h e  t heory, . . .
Chapter 7
Ecological Applications at
the Level of Organisms andSingle-Species Populations:Restoration, Biosecurity and Conservation
EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 186ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 187
appropriate for them. However, management strategies often rely
on an ability to predict where species might do well, whether wewish to restore degraded habitats, predict the future distributionof invasive species (and through biosecurity measures prevent theirarrival), or conserve endangered species in new reserves. Niche
theory therefore provides a vital foundation for many manage-ment actions. We deal with this in Section 7.2.
The life history of a species (see
Chapter 4) is another basic feature thatcan guide management. For example,whether organisms are annuals or
perennials, with or without dormant stages, large or small, or generalists or specialists may inﬂuence their likelihood of beinga successful part of a habitat restoration project, a problematic
invader or a candidate for extinction and therefore worthy of conservation priority. We turn to these ideas in Section 7.3.
A particularly inﬂuential feature of the behavior of organ-
isms, whether animals or plants, is their pattern of movement and dispersion (see Chapter 6). Knowledge of animal migratorybehavior can be especially important in attempts to restore damaged habitats, predict and prioritize invaders, and designconservation reserves. This is covered in Section 7.4.
Conservation of endangered species
requires a thorough understanding ofthe dynamics of small populations. InSection 7.5 we deal with an approach
called population viability analysis (PVA), an assessment of
extinction probabilities that depends on knowledge of life tables(see Chapter 4, in particular Section 4.6), population rates of increase(see Section 4.7), intraspeciﬁc competition (see Chapter 5), densitydependence (see Section 5.2), carrying capacities (see Section 5.3)and, in some cases, metapopulation structure (if the endangeredspecies occurs in a series of linked subpopulations – see Section 6.9).As we shall see in Part 2 of this book (and particularly in the syn-thesis provided in Chapter 14), the determination of abundance,and thus the likelihood of extinction of a population, depends not only on intrinsic properties of individual species (birth anddeath rates, etc.) but also on interactions with other species intheir community (competitors, predators, parasites, mutualists, etc.).However, PVA usually takes a more simplistic approach and doesnot deal explicitly with these complications. For this reason, thetopic is dealt with in the present chapter.
One of the biggest future challenges
to organisms, ecologists and resourcemanagers is global climate change (seeSection 2.9). Attempts to mitigate pre-
dicted changes to climate have an ecological dimension (e.g.plant more trees to soak up some of the extra carbon dioxide produced by the burning of fossil fuels), although mitigation mustalso focus on the economic and sociopolitical dimensions of theproblem. This is discussed in Chapter 22, because the relevant issues relate to ecosystem functioning. However, in the currentchapter we deal with the way we can use knowledge about the
ecology of individual organisms to predict and manage the con-sequences of global climate change such as the spread of diseaseand weeds (see Section 7.6.1) and the positioning of conservationreserves (see Section 7.6.2).
Given the pressing environmental problems we face, it is 
not surprising that a large number of ecologists now perform
research that is applied (i.e. aimed directly at such problems) and then publish it in specialist scientiﬁc journals. But to whatextent is this work assimilated and used by resource managers?Questionnaire assessments by two applied journals, Conservation
Biology (Flashpohler et al. , 2000) and the Journal of Applied Ecology
(Ormerod, 2003), revealed that 82 and 99% of responding authors,respectively, made management recommendations in their papers.
Of these, it is heartening to note that more than 50% of respon-dents reported that their work had been taken up by managers.For papers published between 1999 and 2001 in the Journal of 
Applied Ecology , for example, the use of ﬁndings by managers most 
commonly involved planning aimed at species and habitats of conservation importance, pest species, agroecosystems, riverregulation and reserve design (Ormerod, 2003).
7.2 Niche theory and management
7.2.1 Restoration of habitats impacted by 
human activities
The term ‘restoration ecology’ can be
used, rather unhelpfully, to encompassalmost every aspect of applied ecology(recovery of overexploited ﬁsheries, removal of invaders, reveg-etation of habitat corridors to assist endangered species, etc.)
(Ormerod, 2003). We restrict our consideration here to restora-tion of landscapes and waterscapes whose physical nature has beenaffected by human activities, dealing speciﬁcally with mining, inten-sive agriculture and water abstraction from rivers.
Land that has been damaged by
mining is usually unstable, liable toerosion and devoid of vegetation.Tony Bradshaw, the father of restora-tion ecology, noted that the simple
solution to land reclamation is the reestablishment of vegetationcover, because this will stabilize the surface, be visually attractiveand self-sustaining, and provide the basis for natural or assistedsuccession to a more complex community (Bradshaw, 2002).Candidate plants for reclamation are those that are tolerant of the toxic heavy metals present; such species are characteristic of naturally metalliferous soils (e.g. the Italian serpentine endemicAlyssum bertolonii ) and have fundamental niches that incorporate
the extreme conditions. Moreover, of particular value are ecotypes(genotypes within a species having different fundamental niches
••. . . life history 
theory . . .
. . . and the dynamicsof small populations
the challenge of global climate changeusing knowledge ofspecies niches . . .
...t o  r e c l a i mcontaminated land, . . .EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 187188 CHAPTER 7
– see Section 1.2.1) that have evolved resistance in mined areas.
Antonovics and Bradshaw (1970) were the ﬁrst to note that theintensity of selection against intolerant genotypes changesabruptly at the edge of contaminated areas, and populations oncontaminated areas may differ sharply in their tolerance of heavy
metals over distances as small as 1.5 m (e.g. sweet vernal grass,Anthoxanthum odoratum ). Subsequently, metaltolerant grass cul-
tivars were selected for commercial production in the UK for useon neutral and alkaline soils contaminated by lead or zinc(Festuca rubra cv ‘Merlin’), acidic lead and zinc wastes ( Agrostis 
capillaris cv ‘Goginan’) and acidic copper wastes ( A. capillaris cv
‘Parys’) (Baker, 2002).
Since plants lack the ability to move,
many species that are characteristic 
of metalliferous soils have evolved biochemical systems for nutrient acquisi-tion, detoxiﬁcation and the control of
local geochemical conditions (in effect, they help create the con-ditions appropriate to their fundamental niche). Phytoremediation
involves placing such plants in contaminated soil with the aim ofreducing the concentrations of heavy metals and other toxicchemicals. It can take a variety of forms (Susarla et al. , 2002).
Phytoaccumulation occurs when the contaminant is taken up by
the plants but is not degraded rapidly or completely; theseplants, such as the herb Thlaspi caerulescens that hyperaccumulates
zinc, are harvested to remove the contaminant and then replaced.Phytostabilization , on the other hand, takes advantage of the abil-
ity of root exudates to precipitate heavy metals and thus reduce
bioavailability. Finally, phytotransformation involves elimination 
of a contaminant by the action of plant enzymes; for example,hybrid poplar trees Populus deltoides x nigra have the remarkable
ability to degrade TNT (2,4,6-trinitrotoluene) and show promisein the restoration of munition dump areas. Note that microorgan-
isms are also used for remediation in polluted situations.
Sometimes the aim of land man-
agers is to restore the landscape for the beneﬁt of a particular species. The
European hare Lepus europaeus pro-
vides a case in point. The hare’s fun-damental niche includes landscapescreated over the centuries by human activity. Hares are most common in farmed areas but populations have declined whereagriculture has become too intensive and the species is now protected. Vaughan et al. (2003) used a farm postal survey (1050
farmers responded) to investigate the relationships between hareabundance and current land management. Their aim was to
establish key features of the two most signiﬁcant niche dimen-sions for hares, namely resource availability (crops eaten by hares)and habitat availability, and then to propose management actionto maintain and restore landscapes beneﬁcial to the species.Hares were more common on arable farms, especially on thosegrowing wheat or beet, and where fallow land was present(areas not currently used for crops). They were less common onpasture farms, but the abundance of hares increased if ‘improved’grass (ploughed, sown with a grass mixture and fertilized), somearable crops or woodland were present (Table 7.1). To increasethe distribution and abundance of hares, Vaughan et al. ’s (2003)
recommendations include the provision on all farms of forage and year-round cover (from foxes Vulpes vulpes ), the provision of
woodland, improved grass and arable crops on pasture farms, and
of wheat, beet and fallow land onarable farms.
One of the most pervasive of human
inﬂuences on river ecosystems has been
•• ••. . . to improve
contaminated soil, . . .
Variable Variable description Arable farms Pasture farms
Wheat Wheat Triticum aestivum (no, yes) *** –
Barley Barley (no, yes) ** –
Cereal Other cereals (no, yes) NS –
Spring Any cereal grown in spring? (no, yes) * –
Maize Maize (no, yes) NS –Rape Oilseed rape Brassica napus (no, yes) ** –
Legume Peas/beans/clover Trifolium sp. (no, yes) ** –
Linseed Flax Linum usitatissimum (no, yes) NS –
Horticulture Horticultural crops (no, yes) NS –Beet Beet Beta vulgaris (no, yes) *** –
Arable Arable crops present (see above; no, yes) – **
Grass Grass (including ley, nonpermanent) (no, yes) NS –Type grass Ley, improved, semi-improved, unimproved NS ***
Fallow Set aside/fallow (no, yes) *** –
Woods Woodland/orchard (no, yes) NS *
NS, not signiﬁcant.Table 7.1 Habitat variables potentially
determining the abundance of hares
(estimated from the frequency of haresightings), analyzed separately for arableand pasture farms. Analysis was not
performed for variables where fewer than10% of farmers responded (–). For thosevariables that were signiﬁcantly related towhether or not hares were seen by farmers(*, P<0.05; **, P<0.01; ***, P<0.001), 
the variable descriptor associated withmost frequent sightings are shown in bold. (After Vaughan et al., 2003.). . . to restore
landscape for a declining mammal . . .
...a n d  t o  r e s t o r eriver ﬂow for nativeﬁshEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 188ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 189
the regulation of discharge, and river restoration often involves
reestablishing aspects of the natural ﬂow regime. Water abstrac-tion for agricultural, industrial and domestic use has changed the hydrographs (discharge patterns) of rivers both by reducingdischarge (volume per unit time) and altering daily and seasonal
patterns of ﬂow. The rare Colorado pikeminnow, Ptychocheilus
lucius , is a piscivore (ﬁsh-eater) that is now restricted to the upper
reaches of the Colorado River. Its present distribution is positivelycorrelated with prey ﬁsh biomass, which in turn depends on thebiomass of invertebrates upon which the prey ﬁsh depend, andthis, in its turn, is positively correlated with algal biomass, the basisof the food web (Figure 7.2a–c). Osmundson et al. (2002) argue
that the rarity of pikeminnows can be traced to the accumulationof ﬁne sediment (reducing algal productivity) in downstream
regions of the river. Fine sediment is not part of the funda-mental niche of pikeminnows. Historically, spring snowmelt oftenproduced ﬂushing discharges with the power to mobilize the bed of the stream and remove much of the silt and sand that wouldotherwise accumulate. As a result of river regulation, however,the mean recurrence interval of such discharges has increased 
from once every 1.3–2.7 years to only once every 2.7–13.5 years(Figure 7.2d), extending the period of silt accumulation.
High discharges can inﬂuence ﬁsh in other ways too by, 
for example, maintaining side channels and other elements of 
habitat heterogeneity, and by improving substrate conditions for spawning (all elements of the fundamental niche of particularspecies). Managers must aim to incorporate ecologically inﬂuen-tial aspects of the natural hydrograph of a river into river restora-tion efforts, but this is easier said than done. Jowett (1997)describes three approaches commonly used to deﬁne minimumdischarges: historic ﬂow, hydraulic geometry and habitat assess-ment. The ﬁrst of these assumes that some percentage of the meandischarge is needed to maintain a ‘healthy’ river ecosystem: 30%
is often used as a rule of thumb. Hydraulic methods relate discharge to the hydraulic geometry of stream channels (based on multiple measurements of river cross-sections); river depth andwidth begin to decline sharply at discharges less than a certainpercentage of mean discharge (10% in some rivers) and this
•• ••In(chlorophyll a) (mg m–2)In(invertebrate biomass) (g m–2)
3.5 3.0 0.5004.5
1.5(a)
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
1.0 2.0 2.5
F E D C B ARecurrence interval (yr)
030
Downstream(d)
25
20
15
10
5
Upstream1908–1942
1966–2000In(pikeminnow density) (no. km–1)
9 8 4–432
6(c)
1
0
–1
–2
–3
57
In(fish biomass) (g m–2)
In(fish biomass) (g m–2)
3.5 3.0 0.5309
1.5
In(chlorophyll) (mg m–2)(b)
8
7
6
5
4
1.0 2.0 2.5
Figure 7.2 Interrelationships among biological parameters measured in a number of reaches of the Colorado River in order to determine
the ultimate causes of the declining distribution of Colorado pikeminnows. (a) Invertebrate biomass versus algal biomass (chlor ophyll a).
(b) Prey ﬁsh biomass versus algal biomass. (c) Pikeminnow density versus prey ﬁsh biomass (from catch rate per minute of electr oﬁshing).
(d) Mean recurrence intervals in six reaches of the Colorado River (for which historic data were available) of discharges neces sary to
produce widespread stream bed mobilization and to remove silt and sand that would otherwise accumulate, during recent (1966–200 0) 
and preregulation periods (1908–42). Lines above the histograms show maximum recurrence intervals. (After Osmundson et al. , 2002.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 189190 CHAPTER 7
inﬂection point is sometimes used as a basis for setting a minimum
discharge. Finally, habitat assessment methods are based on dis-charges that meet speciﬁed ecological criteria, such as a criticalamount of food-producing habitat for particular ﬁsh species.Managers need to beware the simpliﬁed assumptions inherent in
these various approaches because, as we saw with the pikemin-nows, the integrity of a river ecosystem may require somethingother than setting a minimum discharge, such as infrequent buthigh ﬂushing discharges.
7.2.2 Dealing with invasions
It is not straightforward to visualize the
multidimensional niche of a specieswhen more than three dimensions areinvolved (see Chapter 2). However, a
mathematical technique called ordination (discussed more fully in
Section 16.3.2) allows us to simultaneously analyze and display
species and multiple environmental variables on the same graph,the two dimensions of which combine the most important of the niche dimensions. Species with similar niches appear closetogether on the graph. Inﬂuential environmental factors appearas arrows indicating their direction of increase within the twodimensions of the graph. Marchetti and Moyle (2001) used an ordination method called canonical correspondence analysis todescribe how a suite of ﬁsh species – 11 native and 14 invaders –
are related to environmental factors at multiple sites in a regu-lated stream in California (Figure 7.3). It is clear that the nativeand invasive species occupy different parts of the niche space: mostof the native species occurred in places associated with higher mean
discharge (m
3s−1), good canopy cover (higher levels of percent
shade), lower concentrations of plant nutrients (lower conductivity,
µS), cooler temperatures (°C) and less pool habitat in the stream
(i.e. greater percent of fast ﬂowing, shallow rifﬂe habitat). Thiscombination of variables reﬂects the natural condition of the stream.
The pattern for introduced species
was generally the opposite: invaders
were favored by the present com-bination of conditions where waterregulation had reduced discharge andincreased the representation of slower ﬂowing pool habitat,riparian vegetation had been removed leading to higher streamtemperatures, and nutrient concentrations had been increased byagricultural and domestic runoff. Marchetti and Moyle (2001) con-
cluded that restoration of more natural ﬂow regimes is neededto limit the advance of invaders and halt the continued down-ward decline of native ﬁsh in this part of the western USA. It shouldnot be imagined, however, that invaders inevitably do less wellin ‘natural’ ﬂow regimes. Invasive brown trout ( Salmo trutta ) in
New Zealand streams seem to do better in the face of high dis-charge events than some native galaxiid ﬁsh (Townsend, 2003).
Of the invader taxa responsible for
economic losses, ﬁsh are a relativelyinsigniﬁcant component. Table 7.2breaks down the tens of thousands of exotic invaders in the USA into a variety of taxonomic groups. Among these, the yellow star thistle
(Centaurea solstitalis ) is a crop weed that now dominates more than
4 million ha in California, resulting in the total loss of once productive grassland. Rats are estimated to destroy US$19 billionof stored grains nationwide per year, as well as causing ﬁres (bygnawing electric wires), polluting foodstuffs, spreading diseasesand preying on native species. The red ﬁre ant ( Solenopsis invicta )
kills poultry, lizards, snakes and ground-nesting birds; in Texasalone, its estimated damage to livestock, wildlife and publichealth is put at about $300 million per year, and a further $200 million is spent on control. Large populations of the zebra mussel ( Dreissena polymorpha ) threaten native mussels and other
fauna, not only by reducing food and oxygen availability but by physically smothering them. The mussels also invade and clog water intake pipes, and millions of dollars need to be spentclearing them from water ﬁltration and hydroelectric generatingplants. Overall, pests of crop plants, including weeds, insects andpathogens, engender the biggest economic costs. However,imported human disease organisms, particularly HIV and inﬂuenzaviruses, cost $7.5 billion to treat and result in 40,000 deaths per year.(See Pimentel et al. , 2000, for further
details and references.)
The alien plants of the British Isles
illustrate a number of points aboutinvaders and the niches they ﬁll
•• ••CCA axis 1CCA axis 2
2 1 –1–2–2–102
01Temperature
Conductivity
PoolsDischarge
Shade
Figure 7.3 Plot of results of canonical correspondence analysis
(ﬁrst two CCA axes) showing native species of ﬁsh ( /H17033), introduced
invader species ( 5) and ﬁve inﬂuential environmental variables
(arrows represent the correlation of the physical variables with 
the canonical axes). (After Marchetti & Moyle, 2001.)a technique for
displaying speciesniches . . .. . . shows why nativeﬁsh are replaced byinvaders
a diversity ofinvaders and theireconomic costs
species niches andthe prediction ofinvasion successEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 190ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 191
(Godfray & Crawley, 1998). Species whose niches encompass areas
where people live and work are more likely to be transported tonew regions, where they will tend to be deposited in habitats likethose where they originated. Thus more invaders are found indisturbed habitats close to transport centers and fewer are found
in remote mountain areas (Figure 7.4a). Moreover, more invadersarrive from nearby locations (e.g. Europe) or from remote loca-tions whose climate (and therefore the invader’s niche) matchesthat found in Britain (Figure 7.4b). Note the small number of alien
plants from tropical environments; these species usually lack thefrost-hardiness required to survive the British winter. Shea andChesson (2002) use the phrase niche opportunity to describe the
potential provided in a given region for invaders to succeed – in
terms of a high availability of resources and appropriate physico-chemical conditions (coupled with a lack or scarcity of natural enemies). They note that human activities often disrupt conditions
•• ••Table 7.2 Estimated annual costs (billions of US$) associated with invaders in the United States. Taxonomic groups are ordered in terms
of the total costs associated with them. (After Pimentel et al., 2000.)
Type of organism Number of invaders Major culprits Loss and damage Control costs Total costs
Microbes (pathogens) >20,000 Crop pathogens 32.1 9.1 41.2
Mammals 20 Rats and cats 37.2 NA 37.2
Plants 5,000 Crop weeds 24.4 9.7 34.1Arthropods 4,500 Crop pests 17.6 2.4 20.0Birds 97 Pigeons 1.9 NA 1.9Molluscs 88 Asian clams, Zebra mussels 1.2 0.1 1.3Fishes 138 Grass carp, etc. 1.0 NA 1.0Reptiles, amphibians 53 Brown tree snake 0.001 0.005 0.006
NA, not available.
Waste ground
Europe
North America
Mediterranean
Asia
South America
China
Turkey and Middle East
South Africa
New Zealand
Japan
Australia
Central America
Atlantic Islands
Tropics
IndiaHedges and shrub
Arable and gardens
Rocks and walls
Woodland
Coasts
Streamsides
Marsh and fen
Grass
Heath
Mountains
0 100 200
Number of alien species300 400 5000 0.2 0.4
Proportion of alien species in total flora0.6 0.8 1(a)
(b)
Figure 7.4 The alien ﬂora of the British
Isles: (a) according to community type
(note the large number of aliens in open,disturbed habitats close to humansettlements) and (b) by geographic origin
(reﬂecting proximity, trade and climaticsimilarity). (After Godfray & Crawley,1998.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 191192 CHAPTER 7
in ways that provide niche opportunities for invaders – river 
regulation is a case in point. Not all invaders cause obvious eco-logical harm or economic loss; indeed some ecologists distinguishexotic species that establish without signiﬁcant consequencesfrom those they consider ‘truly invasive’ – whose populations
expand ‘explosively’ in their new environment, with signiﬁcantimpacts for indigenous species. Managers need to differentiateamong potential new invaders both according to their likelihoodof establishing should they arrive in a new region (largely depend-ent on their niche requirements) and in relation to the probabilityof having dramatic consequences in the receiving community (dealt with in Chapter 22). Management strategies to get rid ofinvading pests usually require an understanding of the dynamicsof interacting populations and are covered in Chapter 17.
7.2.3 Conservation of endangered species
The conservation of species at risk often involves establishing pro-
tected areas and sometimes the translocation of individuals to newlocations. Both approaches should be based on considerations ofthe niche requirements of the species concerned.The overwintering habitat in
Mexico is absolutely critical for the
monarch butterﬂy ( Danaus plexippus ),
which breeds in southern Canada andthe eastern United States. The butterﬂies form dense colonies in oyamel ( Abies religiosa ) forests on 11 separate mountains in 
central Mexico. A group of experts was assembled to deﬁne
objectives, assess and analyze the available data, and to producealternative feasible solutions to the problem of maximizing theprotection of overwintering habitat while minimizing the inclu-
sion of valuable land for logging (Bojorquez-Tapia et al. , 2003). 
As in many areas of applied ecology, ecological and economic 
criteria had to be judged together. The critical dimensions of the butterﬂy’s overwintering niche include relatively warm andhumid conditions (permitting survival and conservation of energy
for the return north) and the availability of streams (resource) fromwhich the butterﬂies drink on clear, hot days. The majority ofknown colony sites are in forests on moderately steep slopes, athigh elevation ( >2890 m), facing towards the south or southwest,
and within 400 m of streams (Figure 7.5). According to thedegree to which locations in central Mexico matched the optimalhabitat features, and taking into account the desire to mimimize
•• ••niche ecology and
the selection ofconservation reservesFrequency
31–35 15–18 7–1002–6102030
11–14
Slope ( °)(a)
51525
27–30 23–26 19–22
Frequency
3336–
34832744–
28912448–
259502299–
2447204060
2596–
2743
Elevation (m)(b)
103050
3188–
33353040–
31872892–
3039Frequency
2401–
26001201–
1400401–
60000–2004080100
801–
1000
Nearness to streams (m)(d)
2060
2001–
22001601–
1800Frequency
NW–N SE–S NE–E0N–NE204060
E–SE
Aspect(c)
103050
W–NW SW–W S–SW
Figure 7.5 Observed frequency distributions of 149 overwintering monarch butterﬂy colonies in central Mexico in relation to: (a) slope,
(b) elevation, (c) aspect and (d) proximity to a stream. (After Bojorquez-Tapia et al. , 2003.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 192ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 193
the inclusion of prime logging habitat, a geographic information
system (GIS) was then used to delineate three scenarios. Thesediffered according to the area the government might be preparedto set aside for monarch butterﬂy conservation (4500 ha, 16,000ha or no constraint) (Figure 7.6). The experts preferred the 
no-constraint scenario, which called for 21,727 ha of reserves(Figure 7.6c), and despite the fact that their recommendation wasthe most expensive it was accepted by the authorities.Unraveling the fundamental niche 
of species that have been driven to
extreme rarity may not be straight-forward. The takahe ( Porphyrio hoch-
stetteri ), a giant rail, is one of only two
remaining species of the guild of large,
ﬂightless herbivorous birds that dominated the prehuman NewZealand landscape (Figure 7.7). Indeed, it was also believed to be
•• ••(c) (b) (a)Figure 7.6 Optimal distribution in 
the mountains of central Mexico of
overwintering monarch butterﬂy reserves(colored areas) according to threescenarios: (a) area constraint of 4500 ha, 
(b) area constraint of 16,000 ha, and (c) noarea constraint (area included is 21,727 ha). The orange lines are the boundariesbetween river catchment areas. Scenario (c) was accepted by the authorities for thedesign of Mexico’s ‘Monarch ButterﬂyBiosphere Reserve’. (After Bojorquez-Tapiaet al. , 2003.)
present distributions
do not alwayscoincide with optimalniche conditions
Pahia
Wakapatu
Colac BayMarfells Beach
GreenhillsEarnscleugh
Castle Rocks
Tokanni MouthCannibal Bay
Forest Hill
McKerchers CavePounaweaFalse I.Long Beach, Kaikais BeachWarrington, WaitatiSwamp, EnfieldNgapara/Totara
Ototara Awamoa
Ross’s RocksMacraesOpihi River, Totara Valley
Kings Cave
Tuarangi Stn sites
Mt Harris, KapuaTimpendeanWeka Pass
Waipara
Pyramid Valley
Waikari CaveWairau
WaiauAnapai
Rotokura
Aniseed
ValleySims, Mansons, Bone Caves
Paturau
Heaphy River
Honeycomb Hill
(6 sites)
Metro CaveHodge Creek and Farriers Cave (Mt Arthur)
Murchison Mountains
(extant population)
Figure 7.7 The location of fossil bones 
of the takahe in the South Island of New
Zealand. (After Trewick & Worthy, 2001.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 193194 CHAPTER 7
extinct until the discovery in 1948 of a small population in the
remote and climatically extreme Murchison Mountains in the south-east of South Island (Figure 7.7). Since then intense conservationefforts have involved habitat management, captive breeding,wild releases into the Murchison Mountains and nearby ranges,
and translocation to offshore islands that lack the mammalsintroduced by people that are now widespread on the mainland(Lee & Jamieson, 2001). Some ecologists argued that because takaheare grassland specialists (tall tussocks in the genus Chionochloa are
their most important food) and adapted to the alpine zone theywould not fare well outside this niche (Mills et al. , 1984). Others
pointed to fossil evidence that the species was once widespreadand occurred mainly at altitudes below 300 m (often in coastalareas – Figure 7.7) where they were associated with a mosaic of 
forest, shrublands and grasslands. These ecologists argued thattakahe might be well suited for life on offshore islands that arefree of mammalian invaders. It turned out that the sceptics werewrong in thinking that translocated island populations would notbecome self-sustaining (takahe have been successfully introducedto four islands), but they seem to have been right that islands wouldnot provide an optimal habitat: island birds have poorer hatch-ing and ﬂedging success than mountain birds ( Jamieson & Ryan,2001). The fundamental niche of takahe probably encompasses a large part of the landscape of South Island, but the species became conﬁned to a much narrower realized niche by peoplewho hunted them, and by mammalian invaders such as red deer(Cervus elaphus scoticus ) that compete with them for food and stoats
(Mustella erminea ) that prey upon them. The current distributions
of species like takahe, which have been driven very close to extinc-
tion, may provide misleading information about niche require-ments. It is likely that neither the Murchison Mountains nor offshoreislands (with pasture rather than tussock grasses) coincide withthe optimal set of conditions and resources of the takahe’s fundamental niche. Historical reconstructions of the ranges ofendangered species may help managers identify the best sites for reserves.
7.3 Life history theory and management
We saw in Chapter 4 that particular combinations of ecological
traits help determine lifetime patterns of fecundity and survival,which in turn determine the distribution and abundance ofspecies in space and time. In this section we consider whether par-ticular traits can be of use to managers concerned with restora-
tion, biosecurity and the risk of extinction of rare species.
7.3.1 Species traits as predictors for effective restoration
Pywell et al. (2003) assembled the results of 25 published experi-
ments dealing with the restoration of species-rich grasslandsfrom land that had previously been
‘improved’ for pasture or used forarable farming. They wished to relateplants’ performances to their life his-tories. On the basis of the results of theﬁrst 4 years of restoration, they calculated a performance indexfor commonly sown grasses (13 species) and forbs (45 species; forbsare deﬁned as herbaceous plants that are not grass-like). The index,calculated for each of the 4 years, was based on the proportionof quadrats (0.4 ×0.4 m or larger) that contained the species in
treatments where that species was sown. Their life history ana-lysis included 38 plant traits, including longevity of seeds in theseed bank, seed viability, seedling growth rate, life form and lifehistory strategy (e.g. competitiveness, stress tolerance, coloniza-tion ability (ruderality)) (Grime et al. , 1988) and the timing of life
cycle events (germination, ﬂowering, seed dispersal). The best performing grasses included Festuca rubra and Trisetum ﬂavescens
(performance indexes averaged for the 4 years of 0.77); andamong the forbs Leucanthemum vulgare (0.50) and Achillea melle-
folium (0.40) were particularly successful. Grasses, which showed
few relationships between species traits and performance (onlyruderality was positively correlated), consistently outperformed theforbs. Within the forbs, good establishment was linked to colon-ization ability, percent germination of seeds, fall germination, vegetative growth, seed bank longevity and habitat generalism,
while competitive ability and seedling growth rate became increas-ingly important determinants of success with time (Table 7.3). Stress tolerators, habitat specialists and species of infertile habitats performed badly (partly reﬂecting the high residualnutrient availability in many restored grasslands). Pywell et al. (2003)
argue that restoration efﬁciency could be increased by only sowing species with the identiﬁed ecological traits. However,because this would lead to uniformity amongst restored grasslands,they also suggest that desirable but poorly performing species couldbe assisted by phased introduction several years after restorationbegins, when environmental conditions are more favorable fortheir establishment.
7.3.2 Species traits as predictors for setting 
biosecurity priorities
A number of species have invaded
widely separated places on the planet(e.g. the shrub Lantana camara (Fig-
ure 7.8), the starling Sturnus vulgaris
and the rat Rattus rattus ) prompting the question of whether 
successful invaders share traits that raise the odds of successful
invasion (Mack et al. , 2000). Were it possible to produce a list of
traits associated with invasion success, managers would be in agood position to assess the risks of establishment, and thus to prioritize potential invaders and devise appropriate biosecurity 
•• ••. . . to set priorities
for dealing withinvasive species . . .using knowledge ofspecies traits . . .. . . to restoregrassland, . . .EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 194ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 195
procedures (Wittenberg & Cock, 2001). The success of some invas-
ive taxa has an element of predictability. Of 100 or so introducedpine species in the USA, for example, the handful that have suc-cessfully encroached into native habitats are characterized bysmall seeds, a short interval between successive large seed crops
and a short juvenile period (Rejmanek & Richardson, 1996). InNew Zealand there is a similarly precise record of successes andfailures of attempted bird introductions. Sol and Lefebvre (2000)found that invasion success increased with introduction effort (number of attempts and number of individuals since Europeancolonization), which is not surprising. Invasion success was alsohigher for nidifugous species whose young are not fed by theirparents (such as game birds), species that do not migrate and, in
particular, birds with relatively large brains. The relationshipwith brain size was partly a consequence of nidifugous specieshaving large brains but probably also reﬂects greater behavioralﬂexibility; the successful invaders have more reports in the inter-
national literature of adopting novel food or feeding techniques(mean for 28 species 1.96, SD 3.21) than the unsuccessful species(mean for 48 species 0.58, SD 1.01).
Despite indications of predictability of invasion success for 
some taxa, related to high fecundity (e.g. pine seed production)and broad niches (e.g. bird behavioral ﬂexibility), exceptions tothe ‘rules’ are common and there are many more cases where
•• ••Trait n Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
Ruderality (colonization ability) 39 +* NS NS NS
Fall germination 42 +* NS NS NS
Germination (%) 43 +** +* +* NS
Seedling growth rate 21 NS +* +** +*
Competitive ability 39 +* +** +*** +***
Vegetative growth 36 +** +* +* +*
Seed bank longevity 44 +* +* +* +*
Stress tolerance 39 −** −** −*** −***
Generalist habitat 45 +** +** +** +**
*, P<0.05; **, P<0.01; ***, P<0.001; n, number of species in analysis; NS, not signiﬁcant.Table 7.3 Ecological traits of forbs that
showed a signiﬁcant relationship with plant
performance in years 1–4 after sowing ingrassland restoration experiments. The sign shows whether the relationship was
positive or negative. (After Pywell et al.,
2003.)
192418581861
1841
1856
1855
1858188319141807
182118091924
18701898
Figure 7.8 The shrub Lantana camara , an example of a very successful invader, was deliberately transported from its native range (shaded
area) to widely dispersed subtropical and tropical locations where it spread and increased to pest proportions. (After Cronk & Fuller, 1995.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 195••196 CHAPTER 7
no relationships have been found, prompting Williamson (1999)
to wonder whether invasions are any more predictable thanearthquakes. The best predictor of invasion success is previoussuccess as an invader elsewhere. However, even this provides invasion managers with useful pointers for prioritizing potential
invaders to their regions.
7.3.3 Species traits as predictors for conservation and
harvest management priorities
Managers would be better able to 
prioritize species for conservationintervention if it were possible to pre-dict, on the basis of species traits, thosemost at risk of extinction. With this in
mind, Angermeier (1995) analyzed the traits of the 197 historic-
ally native freshwater ﬁsh in Virginia, USA, paying particular attention to the characteristics of the 17 species now extinct inVirginia and nine more considered at risk because their rangeshave shrunk signiﬁcantly. Of particular interest was the greatervulnerability of ecological specialists. Thus species whose nicheincluded only one geological type (of several present in Virginia),those restricted to ﬂowing water (as opposed to occurring in bothﬂowing and still water) and those that included only one food
category in their diet (i.e. wholly piscivorous, insectivorous, her-bivorous or detritivorous as opposed to omnivorous on two ormore food categories) had a higher probability of local extinction.It might be supposed that top predators would be at higher risk ofextinction than species at lower trophic levels whose food supplyis more stable. In a study of beetle species in experimentally fragmented forest habitat (compared to continuous forest) Davieset al. (2000) found that among species whose density declined, 
carnivores (10 species, reducing on average by 70%) did indeeddecline more than species feeding on dead wood or other detritus (ﬁve species, reducing on average by 25%).A pattern that has repeatedly
emerged is that extinction risk tends to
be highest for species with a largebody size. Figure 7.9 illustrates this forAustralian marsupials that have goneextinct within the last 200 years or are currently consideredendangered. Some geographic regions (e.g. arid compared tomesic zone) and some taxa (e.g. potoroos, bettongs, bandicoots
and bilbies) have experienced higher extinction/endangerment ratesthan others, but the strongest relationship is between body sizeand risk of extinction (Cardillo & Bromham, 2001). Recall thatbody size is part of a common life history syndrome (essentiallyr/K) that associates large size, late maturity and small reproduct-
ive allocation (see Section 4.12).
Cortes (2002) has explored the relationship between body
size, age at maturity, generation time and the ﬁnite rate of popu-
lation increase λ(referred to in Section 4.7 as R), by generating
age-structured life tables (see Chapter 4) for 41 populations of 38 species of sharks that have been studied around the world. A three-dimensional plot of λagainst generation time and age at
maturity shows what Cortes (2002) calls a ‘fast–slow’ continuum,with species characterized by early age at maturity, short gen-eration times and generally high λat the fast end of the spectrum
(bottom right hand corner of Figure 7.10a). Species at the slowend of the spectrum displayed the opposite pattern (left of 
Figure 7.10a) and also tended to be large bodied (Figure 7.10b).Cortes (2002) further assessed the various species’ ability to respondto changes in survival (due, for example, to human disturbancesuch as pollution or harvesting). ‘Fast’ sharks, such as Sphyrna tiburo ,
could compensate for a 10% decrease in adult or juvenile survivalby increasing the birth rate. On the other hand, particular careshould be taken when considering the state of generally large, slow-growing, long-lived species, such as Carcharhinus leucas . Here, even
moderate reductions to adult or, especially, juvenile survivalrequire a level of compensation in the form of fecundity orimmediately post-birth survival that such species cannot provide.
••. . . and to set
priorities forconservation ofendangered species
Number of species
00.640
4.8
Log10 body weight (g)35
30
25201510
5
0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.7 3.0 3.3 3.6 3.9 4.2 4.5Extinct and endangeredOther species
Extinctlarge body size and
extinction risk areoften correlated
Figure 7.9 Body size frequency
distribution of the Australian terrestrial
marsupial fauna including 25 species thathave gone extinct in the last 200 years(dark orange). Sixteen species currently
considered endangered are shown in gray. (After Cardillo & Bonham, 2001.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 196••ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 197
••1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.85040302010040
32
24
16
8
0Generation time (years)Age at maturity (years)1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
600450
300150040
32
24
16
8
0 Total length (cm) Age at maturity (years) λ  λ(a) (b)
Skates and rays (Rajidae) provide a graphic illustration of Cortes’
warning. Of the world’s 230 species, only four are known to have undergone local extinctions and signiﬁcant range reduction(Figure 7.11a–d). These are among the largest of their group (Fig-ure 7.11e) and Dulvy and Reynolds (2002) propose that seven 
further species, each as large or larger than the locally extinct taxa,should be prioritized for careful monitoring.
7.4 Migration, dispersion and management
7.4.1 Restoration and migratory species
Species that spend part of their time in
one habitat (or region) and part inanother (see Section 6.4) can be badlyaffected by human activities that inﬂu ence the ability to move between
them. The declining populations of
river herrings ( Alosa pseudoharengus and
A. aestivalis ) in the northeastern USA provide a case in point. These
species are anadromous: adults ascend coastal rivers to spawn inlakes between March and July and the young ﬁsh remain in freshwater for 3–7 months before migrating to the ocean. Yako et al.
(2002) sampled river herrings three times per week from June toDecember in the Santuit River downstream of Santuit Pond, whichcontains the only spawning habitat in the catchment. They
identiﬁed periods of migration as either ‘peak’ (>1000 ﬁsh week
−1)or ‘all’ (>30 ﬁsh week−1, obviously including the ‘peak’). By
simultaneously measuring a range of physicochemical and biotic
variables, they aimed to identify factors that could predict the timing of juvenile migration (Figure 7.12). They determined that peaks of migration were most likely to occur during the 
new moon and when the density of important zooplankton prey was low ( Bosmina spp.). All migration periods, taken together 
(30 to 1000 +), tended to occur when water visibility was low and 
during decreased periods of rainfall. It is not unusual for changesin the moon phase to inﬂuence animal behavior by acting as cuesfor life cycle events; in the herrings’ case, migration near to thenew moon phase, when nights are dark, may reduce the risk ofbecoming prey to piscivorous ﬁsh and birds. The trough in avail-ability of the herrings’ preferred food may also play a role in 
promoting migration, and this could be exacerbated by murky water interfering with the foraging of the visually hunting ﬁsh.Predictive models such as the one for river herrings can help man-agers identify periods when river discharge needs to be maintainedto coincide with migration.
Populations of ﬂying squirrels
(Pteromys volans ) have declined dramat-
ically since the 1950s in Finland, mainlybecause of habitat loss, habitat frag-mentation and reduced habitat con-nectivity associated with intensive forestry practices. Areas of naturalforest are now separated by clear-cut and regenerating areas. Thecore breeding habitat of the ﬂying squirrels only occupies a few
hectares, but individuals, particularly males, move to and fromFigure 7.10 Mean population growth rates λof 41 populations from 38 species of shark in relation to: (a) age at maturity and generation
time and (b) age at maturity and total body length. (After Cortes, 2002.)
using knowledge of 
animal movements . . .. . . to restoreharvested ﬁshspecies, . . .
. . . to restore habitat for adeclining squirrelpopulation . . .EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 197198 CHAPTER 7
this core for temporary stays in a much larger ‘dispersal’ area 
(1–3 km2), and juveniles permanently disperse within this range
(Section 6.7 dealt with within-population variation in dispersal).Reunanen et al. (2000) compared the landscape structure aroundknown ﬂying squirrel home ranges (63 sites) with randomly chosen areas (96 sites) to determine the forest patterns that favorthe squirrels. They ﬁrst established that landscape patch types could be divided into optimal breeding habitat (mixed spruce–
•• ••e
e?W. Europe0° 20°E
60°N
50°N
40°N(c)
?
e
e
?
?W. Europe0° 20°E
60°N
50°N
40°N(d)
?
?e
eee
e
epp
?E. USA &
Canada50°N80°W6 0 °W
40°N
30°N(a)
p
?
e
eep
e p
e
e
?W. Europe0° 20°E
60°N
50°N
40°N(b)
100005 0
Body size (cm)150 200 250 3001020Number of species(e)p
Figure 7.11 Historic distribution of four
locally extinct skates in the northwest and
northeast Atlantic: (a) barndoor skateDipturus laevis , (b) common skate D. batis ,
(c) white skate Rostroraja alba and (d) long-
nose skate D. oxyrhinchus . e, area of local
extinction; e?, possible local extinction; 
p, present in recent ﬁsheries surveys; ?, no knowledge of status; scale barrepresents 150 km. (e) Frequencydistribution of skate body size – the fourlocally extinct species are dark orange.(After Dulvy & Reynolds, 2002.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 198ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 199
deciduous forests), dispersal habitat (pine and young forests) and
unsuitable habitat (young sapling stands, open habitats, water).Figure 7.13 shows the amount and spatial arrangement of the breed-ing habitat and dispersal habitat for examples of a typical ﬂyingsquirrel site and a random forest site. Overall, ﬂying squirrel land-
scapes contained three times more suitable breeding habitatwithin a 1 km radius than random landscapes. Squirrel landscapesalso contained about 23% more dispersal habitat than random landscapes but, more signiﬁcantly, squirrel dispersal habitat wasmuch better connected (fewer fragments per unit area) than random landscapes. Reunanen et al. (2000) recommend that for-
est managers should restore and maintain a deciduous mixture,particularly in spruce-dominated forests, for optimal breedinghabitat. But of particular signiﬁcance in the context of dispersal
behavior, they need to ensure good physical connectivity betweenthe optimal squirrel breeding and dispersal habitats.
7.4.2 Predicting the spread of invaders
A broad scale approach to preventing
the arrival of potential invaders is toidentify major ‘migration’ pathways,such as hitchhiking in the mail or cargosand on aircraft or in ships, and to man-
age the risks associated with these (Wittenberg & Cock, 2001).
The Great Lakes of North America have been invaded by morethan 145 alien species, many arriving in the ballast water of
ships. For example, a whole series of recent invaders (includingﬁsh, mussels, amphipods, cladocerans and snails) originated fromthe other end of an important trade route in the Black andCaspian Seas (Ricciardi & MacIsaac, 2000). A ballasted oceanfreighter before taking on cargo in the Great Lakes may discharge3 million liters of ballast water that contain various life stages ofmany plant and animal taxa (and even the cholera bacterium Vibrio
cholerae ) that originate where the ballast water was taken aboard.
One solution is to make the dumping of ballast water in the open
ocean compulsory rather than voluntary (this is now the case forthe Great Lakes). Other possible methods involve ﬁlter systemswhen loading ballast water, and on-board treatment by ultra-violet irradiation or waste heat from the ship’s engines.
The most damaging invaders are not simply those that arrive
in a new part of the world; the subsequent pattern and speed of their spread is also signiﬁcant to managers. Zebra mussels
(Dreissena polymorpha ) have had a devastating effect (see Sec-
tion 7.2.2) since arriving in North America via the Caspian Sea/Great Lakes trade route. Range expansion quickly occurred through-out commercially navigable waters, but overland dispersal intoinland lakes, mainly attached to recreational boats, has beenmuch slower (Kraft & Johnson, 2000). Geographers have developed so-called ‘gravity’ models to predict human dispersal patterns based on distance to and attractiveness of destination points, and
Bossenbroek et al. (2001) adopted the technique to predict the spread
of zebra mussels through the inland lakes of Illinois, Indiana,
•• ••(a)Discharge (m3 s–1)
0.050.100.150.200.250.300.35P
PAAAP A
ALunar cycle(e)
PPA
A
NewFull
PA
AA(f)
PPAA PA
0510152025
Jul Aug Sep OctAABosmina density (no. l–1)(c)Secchi depth ( m)
0.5PPAA
A1.01.52.02.53.0
Jul Aug Sep OctP A A(d)Rainfall (cm)0.00 PPAA
AP
AA 0.250.500.751.00(b)Temperature ( °C)
12PPAA
A
16202428
P A
A
Figure 7.12 Variation in physical and
biotic variables in the Santuit River, USA
during the migratory period of riverherrings: (a) discharge, (b) temperature, (c) Secchi disc depth (low values indicate
poor light transmission because of highturbidity), (d) rainfall, (e) lunar cycle and(f ) Bosmina density. P denotes ‘peak’
periods of migration ( >1000 ﬁsh week
−1), 
P and A ( >30 ﬁsh week−1) together denote
‘all’ periods of migration. (After Yako et al. ,
2002.)
. . . and to predict
the spread ofinvadersEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 199200 CHAPTER 7
Michigan and Wisconsin (364 counties in all). The model has three
steps involving (i) the probability of a boat traveling to a zebramussel source; (ii) the probability of the same boat making a sub-sequent outing to an uncolonized lake; and (iii) the probabilityof zebra mussels becoming established in the uncolonized lake.
1Uninfested boats travel to an already colonized lake or boat
ramp and inadvertently pick up mussels. The number ofboats, T, that travel from county i to a lake or boat ramp, j,
is estimated as:
T
ij=AiOiWjcij−α
where Aiis a correction factor that ensures all boats from 
county ireach some lake, Oiis the number of boats in county
i,Wjis the attractiveness of location j, cij is the distance from
county ito location jand αis a distance coefﬁcient.
2Infested boats travel to an uncolonized lake and release mus-
sels. The number of infested boats Piconsists of those boaters
that travel from county ito a source of zebra mussels,summed for each county over the total number of zebra
mussel sources. Tiu, then, is the number of infested boats that
travel from county ito an uncolonized lake u:
Tiu=AiPiWuciu−α.
The total number of infested boats that arrive at a given
uncolonized lake is summed over all the counties ( Qu).
3The probability that transported individuals will establish a newcolony depends on lake physicochemistry (i.e. key elementsof the mussel’s fundamental niche) and stochastic elements.In the model, a new colony is recruited if Q
uis greater than a
colonization threshold of f.
To generate a probabilistic distribution of zebra mussel-colonized
lakes, 2000 trials were run for 7 years and the number of colonizedlakes for each county was estimated by summing the individualcolonization probabilities for each lake in the county. The results,shown in Figure 7.14, are highly correlated with the pattern ofcolonization that actually occurred up to 1997, giving conﬁdence
•• ••
1000  m
1000  m1000  m
1000  mPteromys
RandomBreeding habitats Breeding plus dispersal habitats
Figure 7.13 The spatial arrangement of patches (dark) of breeding habitat (left hand panels) and breeding plus dispersal habitat (right
hand panels) in a typical landscape containing ﬂying squirrels ( Pteromys ) (top panels) and a random forest location (bottom panels). This
ﬂying squirrel landscape contains 4% breeding habitat and 52.4% breeding plus dispersal habitat, compared with 1.5 and 41.5% fo r the
random landscape. Dispersal habitat in the squirrel landscape is much more highly connected (fewer fragments per unit area) tha n in 
the random landscape. (After Reunanen et al. , 2000.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 200ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 201
in the predictions of the model. However, areas of central
Wisconsin and western Michigan were predicted to be colonized,but no colonies have so far been documented. Bossenbroek et al.
(2001) suggest that invasion may be imminent in these locations,which should therefore be the focus of biosecurity efforts and 
education campaigns.
Of course invaders do not all rely on human agency; many
disperse by their own devices. The red ﬁre ant ( Solenopsis invicta )
has spread rapidly through much of southern USA with dramaticeconomic consequences (see Section 7.2.2). The species, whichoriginated in Argentina, occurs in two distinct social forms. Thesingle-queened (monogyne) form and the multiple-queened(polygyne) form differ in their patterns of reproduction andmodes of dispersal. The queens from monogyne colonies take part
in mating ﬂights and found colonies independently, whereas thequeens from polygyne colonies are adopted into establishednests after mating. As a result, the monogyne populations spreadthree orders of magnitude more quickly than their polygynecounterparts (Holway & Suarez, 1999). The ability of managersto prioritize potentially problematic invaders and to devise strat-egies to counter their spread can be expected to be improved bya thorough understanding of the invaders’ behavior.7.4.3 Conservation of migratory species
An understanding of the behavior of
species at risk can also assist managersto devise conservation strategies. Suther-land (1998) describes an intriguing case where the knowledge of migratory
and dispersal behavior has proved critical. A scheme was devised to alter the migration route of thelesser white-fronted geese ( Anser erythropus ) from southeastern
Europe, where they tend to get shot, to spend their winters inthe Netherlands. A population of captive barnacle geese ( Branta
leucopsis ) breeds in Stockholm Zoo but overwinters in the
Netherlands. Some were taken to Lapland where they nested andwere given lesser white-fronted goose eggs to rear. The younggeese then ﬂew with their adopted parents to the Netherlands 
for the winter, but next spring the lesser white-fronted geesereturned to Lapland and bred with conspeciﬁcs there, subsequentlyreturning again to the Netherlands. Another example involves thereintroduction of captive-reared Phascogale tapoatafa , a carnivorous
marsupial. Soderquist (1994) found that if males and femaleswere released together, the males dispersed and females could not
•• ••0–0.25
0.25–0.5
0.5–1Infected lakes
1–3
>4111
1
1
1
11
11
1
151
131
4
43
327N(a) (b)
N
0 100 km 0 100 km
Figure 7.14 (a) The predicted distribution (based on 2000 iterations of a stochastic ‘gravity’ model of dispersal) of inland lakes colonize d
by zebra mussels in 364 counties in the USA; the large lake in the middle is Lake Michigan, one of the Great Lakes of North Ame rica. 
(b) The actual distribution of colonized lakes as of 1997. (After Bossenbroek et al. , 2001.)
using behavioral
ecology . . .. . . to conserveendangered species . . .EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 201202 CHAPTER 7
ﬁnd a mate. Much more successful was a ‘ladies ﬁrst’ release
scheme; this allowed the females to establish a home rangebefore males came and joined them.
Where migrating species are con-
cerned, the design of nature reserves
must take account of their seasonalmovements. The Qinling Province in
China is home to approximately 220 giant pandas ( Ailuropoda
melanoleuca ), representing about 20% of the wild population of
one of the world’s most imperiled mammals. Of particularsigniﬁcance is the fact that pandas in this region are elevationalmigrants, needing both low and high elevation habitat to survive,but current nature reserves do not cater for this. Pandas are extremedietary specialists, primarily consuming a few species of bamboo.
In Qinling Province, from June to September pandas eat Fargesia
spathacea , which grows from 1900 to 3000 m. But as colder weather
sets in, they travel to lower elevations and from October to Maythey feed primarily on Bashania fargesii , which grows from 1000
to 2100 m. Loucks et al. (2003) used a combination of satellite
imagery, ﬁeldwork and GIS analysis to identify a landscape to meetthe long-term needs of the species. The process for selecting poten-tial habitat ﬁrst excluded areas lacking giant pandas, forest blockareas that were smaller than 30 km
2(the minimum area needed
to support a pair of giant pandas over the short term) and forest
with roads, settlements or plantation forests. Figure 7.15 maps summer habitat (1900–3000 m; F. spathacea present), fall/winter/spring habitat (1400–2100 m; B. fargesii present) and a small
amount of year-round habitat (1900–2100 m, both bamboo
species present) and identiﬁes four areas of core panda habitat (A–D)that provide for the migrational needs of the pandas. Superimposedon Figure 7.15 are the current nature reserves; disturbingly, theycover only 45% of the core habitat. Loucks et al. (2003) recom-
mend that the four core habitat areas they have identiﬁed shouldbe incorporated into a reserve network. Moreover, they note theimportance of promoting linkage between the zones, becauseextinction in any one area (and in all combined) is more likely if
the populations are isolated from each other (see Section 6.9, whichdeals with metapopulation behavior). Thus, they also identify two important linkage zones for protection, between areas A andB where steep topography means few roads exist, and betweenB and D across high elevation forests.
7.5 Dynamics of small populations and 
the conservation of endangered species
Extinction has always been a fact of life, but the arrival on the
scene of humans has injected some novelty into the list of its causes.Overexploitation by hunting was probably the ﬁrst of these, but more recently a large array of other impacts have beenbrought to bear, including habitat destruction, introduction of 
exotic pest species and pollution. Not surprisingly, conservation
•• ••A
BC
DTaibai Mountain
ChangqingLaoxianchengZhouzhi
Foping
JiaoxiRiverYoushuiRiverJinshuiRiverXushuiRiver
01 0Scale 1:800,00
20 km
Figure 7.15 Core panda habitats (A–D),
each of which caters for the year-round
needs of the elevational migration of giant pandas in China’s Qinling Province.Superimposed are current nature reserves
(cross-hatched) and their names. (AfterLoucks et al. , 2003.)
. . . and to design
nature reservesEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 202ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 203
of the world’s remaining species has come to assume great import-
ance. Here we deal with the conservation of species populations,leaving the management of communities and ecosystems toChapter 22.
7.5.1 The scale of the problem
To judge the scale of the problem facing conservation man-agers we need to know the total number of species that occur in the world, the rate at which these are going extinct and howthis rate compares with that of prehuman times. Unfortunately,there are considerable uncertainties in our estimates of all these
things.
About 1.8 million species have so 
far been named (Alonso et al. , 2001), but
the real number is very much larger.Estimates have been derived in a vari-
ety of ways (see May, 1990). One approach is based on a generalobservation that for every temperate or boreal mammal or bird(taxa where most species have now apparently been described)there are approximately two tropical counterparts. If this is
assumed also to hold for insects (where there are many undescribedspecies), the grand total would be around 3–5 million. Anotherapproach uses information on the rate of discovery of newspecies to project forward, group by group, to a total estimate ofup to 6–7 million species in the world. A third approach is basedon a species size–species richness relationship, taking as its start-ing point that as one goes down from terrestrial animals whosecharacteristic linear dimensions are a few meters to those ofaround 1 cm, there is an approximate empirical rule that for each10-fold reduction in length there are 100 times the number ofspecies. If the observed pattern is arbitrarily extrapolated downto animals of a characteristic length of 0.2 mm, we arrive at a globaltotal of around 10 million species of terrestrial animals. A fourth
approach is based on estimates of beetle species richness (morethat 1000 species recorded in one tree) in the canopies of tropicaltrees (about 50,000 species), and assumptions about the proportionof nonbeetle arthropods that will also be present in the canopyplus other species that do not occupy the canopy; this yields anestimate of about 30 million tropical arthropods. The uncertain-ties in estimating global species richness are profound and our bestguesses range from 3 to 30 million or more.
An analysis of recorded extinctions
during the modern period of human history shows that the majority haveoccurred on islands and that birds andmammals have been particularly badly
affected (Figure 7.16). The percentage of extant species involvedappears at ﬁrst glance to be quite small, and moreover, theextinction rate appears to have dropped in the latter half of the20th century, but how good are these data?Once again, these estimates are bedevilled by uncertainty. First,
the data are much better for some taxa and in some places than
others, so the patterns in Figure 7.16 must be viewed with a gooddeal of scepticism. For example, there may be serious underestim-ates even for the comparatively well-studied birds and mammals
because many tropical species have not received the carefulattention needed for fully certiﬁed extinction. Second, a very largenumber of species have gone unrecorded and we will neverknow how many of these have become extinct. Finally, the dropin recorded extinctions in the latter half of the 20th century may signal some success for the conservation movement. But itmight equally well be due to the convention that a species is onlydenoted extinct if it has not been recorded for 50 years. Or it may
indicate that many of the most vulnerable species are alreadyextinct. Balmford et al. (2003) suggest that all our attention
should not be focused on extinction rates, but that a more mean-ingful view of the scale of the problem of species at risk will comefrom the long-term assessment of changes (often signiﬁcantreductions) in the relative abundance of species (which have notyet gone extinct) or of their habitats.
An important lesson from the fossil
record is that the vast majority, proba-
bly all, of extant species will becomeextinct eventually – more than 99% of species that ever existedare now extinct (Simpson, 1952). However, given that individualspecies are believed, on average, to have lasted for 1–10 millionyears (Raup, 1978), and if we take the total number of species onearth to be 10 million, we would predict that only an average of between 100 and 1000 species (0.001–0.01%) would go extincteach century. The current observed rate of extinction of birds and mammals of about 1% per century is 100–1000 times this ‘natural’ background rate. Furthermore, the scale of the most powerful human inﬂuence, that of habitat destruction, continuesto increase and the list of endangered species in many taxa is alarm-
ingly long (Table 7.4). We cannot be complacent. The evidence,whilst inconclusive because of the unavoidable difﬁculty of mak-ing accurate estimates, suggests that our children and grandchil-dren may live through a period of species extinction comparableto the ﬁve ‘natural’ mass extinctions evident in the geological record(see Chapter 21).
7.5.2 Where should we focus conservation effort?
Several categories of risk of species
extinction have been deﬁned (Mace & Lande, 1991). A species can bedescribed as vulnerable if there is considered to be a 10% prob-
ability of extinction within 100 years, endangered if the probability
is 20% within 20 years or 10 generations, whichever is longer, and
critically endangered if within 5 years or two generations the risk of
extinction is at least 50% (Figure 7.17). Based on these criteria,
•• ••how many species 
on earth?
modern and historicextinction ratescompareda human-inducedmass extinction?
classiﬁcation of thethreat to speciesEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 203204 CHAPTER 7
43% of vertebrate species have been classiﬁed as threatened 
(i.e. they fell into one of the above categories) (Mace, 1994).
On the basis of these deﬁnitions, both governments and non-
governmental organizations have produced threatened species lists(the basis of analyses like that shown in Table 7.4). Clearly, these
lists provide a starting point for setting priorities for developingplans to manage individual species. However, resources for con-servation are limited and spending the most money on specieswith the highest extinction probabilities will be a false economyif a particular highly ranked species would require a huge recov-ery effort but with little chance of success (Possingham et al. , 2002).
As in all areas of applied ecology, conservation priorities have bothecological and economic dimensions. In desperate times, painfuldecisions have to be made about priorities. Wounded soldiers arriv-
ing at ﬁeld hospitals in the First World War were subjected to atriage evaluation: priority 1 – those who were likely to survive
but only with rapid intervention; priority 2 – those who were likely
to survive without rapid intervention; priority 3 – those who werelikely to die with or without intervention. Conservation managersare often faced with the same kind of choices and need to
demonstrate some courage in giving up on hopeless cases, andprioritizing those species where something can be done.
Species that are at high risk of
extinction are almost always rare. Nev-ertheless, rare species, just by virtue of their rarity, are not necessarily atrisk of extinction. It is clear that many, probably most, speciesare naturally rare. The population dynamics of such species mayfollow a characteristic pattern. For example, out of a group of four
species of Calochortus lilies in California, one is abundant and three
•• ••North America
South America
Europe
North Africa and Middle East
Africa
Asia
Australasia
2000 1900 1700 1600103040
1800
Year(b)
20Number of recorded extinctions
2000 1900 1700 1600206080
1800
Year(a)
40Atlantic Ocean and islands
Southern Ocean and islands
Pacific Ocean and islands
Indian Ocean and islands
(c)Taxonomic extinction (%)
2000 1900 1700 16000.020.060.08
1800
Year0.04Molluscs
Crustaceans
Insects
2000 1900 1700 16000.10.30.4
1800
Year(d)
0.2Fishes
Amphibians
Reptiles
Birds
Mammals
Figure 7.16 Trends in recorded animal species extinctions since 1600, for which a date is known, in: (a) the major oceans and their
islands, (b) major continental areas, for (c) invertebrates and (d) vertebrates. (After Smith et al. , 1993.)
many species are
naturally rareEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 204ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 205
are rare (Fiedler, 1987). The rare species have larger bulbs but 
produce fewer fruits per plant and have a smaller probability of survival to reproductive age than the common species. Therare species can all be categorized as climax species that arerestricted to unusual soil types, whilst the common one is a 
colonizer of disturbed habitats. Rare taxa may generally have atendency towards asexual reproduction, lower overall reproduc-tive effort and poorer dispersal abilities (Kunin & Gaston, 1993).In the absence of human interference there is no reason toexpect that the rarer types would be substantially more at risk of extinction.However, while some species are
born rare, others have rarity thrust upon
them. The actions of humans haveundoubtedly reduced the abundanceand range of many species (including naturally rare species). Areview of the factors responsible for recorded vertebrate extinc-tions shows that habitat loss, overexploitation and invasions 
of exotic species are all of considerable signiﬁcance, although habitat loss was less prominent in the case of reptiles and over-exploitation less important in the case of ﬁshes (Table 7.5). As far as threatened extinctions are concerned, habitat loss is mostcommonly the major hazard, whilst risk of overexploitationremains very high, especially for mammals and reptiles. Theprobability of extinction may be enhanced in small populationsfor two different reasons related to genetics (Section 7.5.3) andpopulation dynamics (Section 7.5.4). We deal with them in turn.
7.5.3 Genetics of small populations: signiﬁcance for
species conservation
Theory tells conservation biologists 
to beware genetic problems in smallpopulations that may arise throughloss of genetic variation. Genetic vari-ation is determined primarily by the joint action of natural 
selection and genetic drift (where the frequency of genes in a population is determined by chance rather than evolutionaryadvantage). The relative importance of genetic drift is higher insmall, isolated populations, which as a consequence are expected
•• ••Number of Approximate Percentage 
Taxons threatened species total species threatened
Animals
Molluscs 354 1050.4
Crustaceans 126 4.0 ×1033
Insects 873 1.2 ×1060.07
Fishes 452 2.4 ×1042
Amphibians 59 3.0 ×1032
Reptiles 167 6.0 ×1033
Birds 1,029 9.5 ×10311
Mammals 505 4.5 ×10311
Total 3,565 1.35 ×1060.3
PlantsGymnosperms 242 758 32Monocotyledons 4,421 5.2 ×10
49
Monocotyledons: palms 925 2,820 33Dicotyledons 17,474 1.9 ×10
59
Total 22,137 2.4 ×1059Table 7.4 The current numbers and
percentages of named animal and plant
species in major taxa judged to bethreatened with extinction. The highervalues associated with plants, birds 
and mammals may reﬂect our greaterknowledge of these taxa. (After Smith et al. , 1993.)
Time (years)
1.0 0.6 0.20
0.0100150200
0.4
Probability of extinction50
0.8Safe
Vulnerable
Endangered
Critical
Figure 7.17 Levels of threat as a function of time and probability
of extinction. (After Akçakaya, 1992.)other species have
rarity thrust uponthem
possible geneticproblems in smallpopulationsEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 205206 CHAPTER 7
to lose genetic variation. The rate at which this happens depends
on the effective population size ( Ne). This is the size of the ‘genet-
ically idealized’ population to which the actual population ( N) is
equivalent in genetic terms. As a ﬁrst approximation, Neis equal
to or less than the number of breeding individuals. Neis usually
less, often much less, than N, for a number of reasons (detailed
formulae can be found in Lande & Barrowclough, 1987):
1If the sex ratio is not 1 : 1; for example with 100 breeding males
and 400 breeding females N=500, but Ne=320.
2If the distribution of progeny from individual to individual is
not random; for instance if 500 individuals each produce oneindividual for the next generation on average N=500, but 
if the variance in progeny production is 5 (with random 
variation this would be 1), then N
e=100.
3If population size varies from generation to generation, 
then Neis disproportionately inﬂuenced by the smaller sizes;
for example for the sequence 500, 100, 200, 900 and 800, meanN=500, but N
e=258.
The preservation of genetic diversity is important because of the long-term
evolutionary potential it provides. Rare
forms of a gene (alleles), or combinations of alleles, may conferno immediate advantage but could turn out to be well suited tochanged environmental conditions in the future. Small popula-tions that have lost rare alleles, through genetic drift, have lesspotential to adapt.A more immediate potential prob-
lem is inbreeding depression. When
populations are small there is a ten-dency for individuals breeding with one another to be related.Inbreeding reduces the heterozygosity of the offspring far belowthat of the population as a whole. More important, though, is that
all populations carry recessive alleles which are deleterious, or evenlethal, when homozygous. Individuals that are forced to breed withclose relatives are more likely to produce offspring where the harm-ful alleles are derived from both parents so the deleterious effectis expressed. There are many examples of inbreeding depression– breeders have long been aware of reductions in fertility, sur-vivorship, growth rates and resistance to disease – although highlevels of inbreeding may be normal and nondeleterious in someanimal species (Wallis, 1994) and many plants.
How many individuals are needed to
maintain genetic variability? Franklin
(1980) suggested that an effective population size of about 50 would beunlikely to suffer from inbreeding depression, whilst 500–1000might be needed to maintain longer term evolutionary potential(Franklin & Frankham, 1998). Such rules of thumb should beapplied cautiously and, bearing in mind the relationship between
N
eand N, the minimum population size Nshould probably be set
an order of magnitude higher than Ne(5000–12,500 individuals)
(Franklin & Frankham, 1998).
It is interesting that no example of extinction due to genetic
problems is found in Table 7.5. Perhaps inbreeding depression has
•• ••Percentage due to each cause *
Species 
Group Habitat loss Overexploitation † introduction Predators Other Unknown
Extinctions
Mammals 19 23 20 1 1 36Birds 20 11 22 0 2 37Reptiles 5 32 42 0 0 21Fishes 35 4 30 0 4 48
Threatened extinctions
Mammals 68 54 6 8 12 –Birds 58 30 28 1 1 –Reptiles 53 63 17 3 6 –Amphibians 77 29 14 – 3 –Fishes 78 12 28 – 2 –
*The values indicated represent the percentage of species that are inﬂuenced by the given factor.
Some species may be inﬂuenced by more than one factor, thus, some rows may exceed 100%.† Overexploitation includes commercial, sport, and subsistence hunting and live animal capture forany purpose.Table 7.5 Review of the factors
responsible for recorded extinctions of
vertebrates and an assessment of riskscurrently facing species categorizedglobally as endangered, vulnerable or 
rare by the International Union for theConservation of Nature (IUCN). (AfterReid & Miller, 1989.)loss of evolutionary
potentialrisk of inbreedingdepression
magic geneticnumbers?EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 206ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 207
occurred, although undetected, as part of the ‘death rattle’ of some
dying populations (Caughley, 1994). Thus, a population mayhave been reduced to a very small size by one or more of theprocesses described above and this may have led to an increasedfrequency of matings amongst relatives and the expression of 
deleterious recessive alleles in offspring, leading to reduced survivorship and fecundity, causing the population to becomesmaller still – the so-called extinction vortex (Figure 7.18).
Evidence of a role of genetic effects
in population persistence was reportedin a study of 23 local populations of the rare plant Gentianella germanica in
grasslands in the Jura mountains (Swiss–
German border). Fischer and Matthies (1998) found a negative 
correlation between reproductive performance and population size (Figure 7.19a–c). Furthermore, population size decreasedbetween 1993 and 1995 in most of the studied populations, butpopulation size decreased more rapidly in the smaller populations(Figure 7.19d). These results are consistent with the hypothesisthat genetic effects resulted in a reduction in ﬁtness in the smallpopulations. However, they may equally have been caused by dif-ferences in local habitat conditions (small populations may be smallbecause they have low fecundity resulting from low-quality habitat) or because of the disruption of plant–pollinator inter-actions (small populations may have low fecundity because of lowfrequencies of visitation by pollinators). To determine whethergenetic differences were, indeed, responsible, seeds from each 
population were grown under standard conditions in a commongarden experiment. After 17 months, there were signiﬁcantlymore ﬂowering plants and more ﬂowers (per planted seed) fromseeds from large populations than those from small populations.We can conclude that genetic effects are of importance for popu-lation persistence in this rare species and need to be consideredwhen developing a conservation management strategy.7.5.4 Uncertainty and the risk of extinction: 
the population dynamics of small populations
Much of conservation biology is a crisis discipline. Managers 
are inevitably confronted with too many problems and too fewresources. Should they focus attention on the various forces thatbring species to extinction and attempt to persuade governmentsto act to reduce their prevalence; or should they restrict activit-
ies to identifying areas of high species richness where reserves canbe set up and protected (see Section 22.4); or should they ident-ify species at most risk of extinction and work out ways of keeping them in existence? Ideally, we should do all these things.However, the greatest pressure is often in the area of species pre-servation. For example, the remaining populations of pandas inChina or of yellow-eyed penguins ( Megadyptes antipodes ) in New
Zealand has become so small that if nothing is done the speciesmay become extinct within a few years or decades. Responding
to the crisis requires that we devote scarce resources to identi-fying some special solutions; more general approaches may haveto be put on the back-burner.
The dynamics of small populations
are governed by a high level of uncer-tainty, whereas large populations can be described as being governed by thelaw of averages (Caughley, 1994). Three kinds of uncertainty or
variation can be identiﬁed that are of particular importance to thefate of small populations.
1Demographic uncertainty: random variations in the number
of individuals that are born male or female, or in the numberthat happen to die or reproduce in a given year or in the quality (genotypic/phenotypic) of the individuals in terms of survival/reproductive capacities can matter very much to thefate of small populations. Suppose a breeding pair produces a
•• ••More
geneticdrift; lessability toadaptMore
inbreeding
depressionPopulation
moresubdividedby
fragmentationMore
demographic
variation
Lower effective
population size
(Ne)
• Habitat destruction
• Environmental degradation• Habitat fragmentation
• Overharvesting
• Effects of exotic species• Environmental variation
• Catastrophic events
Extinction
Figure 7.18 Extinction vortices may
progressively lower population sizes
leading inexorably to extinction. (AfterPrimack, 1993.)
genetic effects and
the persistence of a rare plant
three kinds ofuncertainty for smallpopulations . . .EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 207208 CHAPTER 7
clutch consisting entirely of females – such an event would
go unnoticed in a large population but it would be the laststraw for a species down to its last pair.
2Environmental uncertainty: unpredictable changes in envir-onmental factors, whether ‘disasters’ (such as ﬂoods, storms
or droughts of a magnitude that occur very rarely – seeChapter 2) or more minor (year to year variation in averagetemperature or rainfall), can also seal the fate of a small population. Even where the average rainfall of an area isknown accurately, because of records going back centuries, we cannot predict whether next year will be average orextreme, nor whether we are in for a number of years of particularly dry conditions. A small population is more likelythan a large one to be reduced by adverse conditions to zero
(extinction), or to numbers so low that recovery is impossible(quasi-extinction).
3Spatial uncertainty: many species consist of an assemblage of subpopulations that occur in more or less discrete patchesof habitat (habitat fragments). Since the subpopulations are likelyto differ in terms of demographic uncertainty, and the patchesthey occupy in terms of environmental uncertainty, the patchdynamics of extinction and local recolonization can beexpected to have a large inﬂuence on the chance of extinctionof the metapopulation (see Section 6.9).To illustrate some of these ideas, take
the demise in North America of theheath hen ( Tympanychus cupido cupido )
(Simberloff, 1998). This bird was once extremely common fromMaine to Virginia. Being tasty and easy to shoot (and also sus-
ceptible to introduced cats and affected by conversion of itsgrassland habitat to farmland), by 1830 it had disappeared fromthe mainland and was only found on the island of Martha’sVineyard. In 1908 a reserve was established for the remaining 50 birds and by 1915 the population had increased to several thousand. However, 1916 was a bad year. Fire (a disaster) elim-inated much of the breeding ground, there was a particularly hardwinter coupled with an inﬂux of goshawks ( Accipiter gentilis )
(environmental uncertainty), and ﬁnally poultry disease arrived
on the scene (another disaster). At this point, the remnant population was likely to have become subject to demographicuncertainty; for example, of the 13 birds remaining in 1928 onlytwo were females. A single bird was left in 1930 and the speciesbecame extinct in 1932.
The heath hen provides one example of a relatively recent global
extinction. At a different scale, local extinctions of small popula-
tions in insular habitat patches are common events for diversetaxa, often being in the range of 10–20% per year (Figure 7.20).Such extinctions are also observed on true islands. The detailed
•• ••25
2015
10
5
010 100 1000 10,000Fruits per plant(a) (b)
80
7060
50
403010 100 1000 10,000Seeds per fruit
1500
1200
900
600
300
010 100 1000 10,000
Number of plants in population
(log scale)(c)Seeds per plant
Number of plants in population
(log scale)Population growth rate (log scale)(d)
10 100 1000 10,0001.5
1.0
0.5Figure 7.19 Relationships for 23
populations of Gentianella germanica
between population size and (a) mean
number of fruits per plant, (b) meannumber of seeds per fruit and (c) mean
number of seeds per plant. (d) Therelationship between the populationgrowth rate from 1993 to 1995 (ratio ofpopulation sizes) and population size (in1994). (From Fischer & Matthies, 1998.)
. . . illustrated by 
the heath henEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 208ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 209
records from 1954 to 1969 of birds breeding on Bardsey Island, a
small island (1.8 km2) off the west coast of Great Britain, revealed
that 16 species bred every year, two of the original species dis-appeared, 15 ﬂickered in and out, whilst four were initially absentbut became regular breeders (Diamond, 1984). We can build apicture of frequent local extinctions, which in some cases are coun-
tered by recolonization from the mainland or other islands.Examples such as these provide a rich source of information aboutthe factors affecting the fate of small populations in general. Theunderstanding gained is entirely applicable to species in dangerof global extinction, since a global extinction is nothing more norless than the ﬁnal local extinction. Thus, of the high-risk factorsassociated with local extinctions, habitat or island area is probablythe most pervasive (Figure 7.21). No doubt the main reason forthe vulnerability of populations in small areas is the fact that the
populations themselves are small. A local extinction of an endemicspecies on a remote island is precisely equivalent to a global extinc-tion, since recolonization is impossible. This is a principal reasonfor the high rates of global extinction on islands (see Figure 7.16).
7.5.5 Population viability analysis: the application of
theory to management
The focus of population viability ana-
lysis (PVA) differs from many of the population models developed by ecologists (such as those discussed in
Chapters 5, 10 and 14) because an aim of PVA is to predict
extreme events (such as extinction) rather that central tendenciessuch as mean population sizes. Given the environmental circum-
stances and life history characteristics of a particular rare species,what is the chance it will go extinct in a speciﬁed period?Alternatively, how big must its population be to reduce thechance of extinction to an acceptable level? These are frequentlythe crunch questions in conservation management. The ideal classical approach of experimentation, which might involve set-ting up and monitoring for several years a number of populationsof various sizes, is unavailable to those concerned with species atrisk, because the situation is usually too urgent and there areinevitably too few individuals to work with. How then are weto decide what constitutes the minimum viable population
(MVP)? Three approaches will be discussed in turn: (i) a searchfor patterns in evidence already gathered in long-term studies(Section 7.5.5.1); (ii) subjective assessment based on expertknowledge (Section 7.5.5.2); and (iii) the development of popu-lation models, both general (Section 7.5.5.3) and speciﬁc to par-ticular species of interest (Section 7.5.5.4). All the approaches havetheir limitations, which we will explore by looking at particularexamples. But ﬁrst it should be noted that the ﬁeld of PVA haslargely moved away from the simple estimation of extinction 
probabilities and times to extinction, to focus on the comparisonof likely outcomes (in terms of extinction probabilities) of altern-ative management strategies.
7.5.5.1 Clues from long-term studies of biogeographic patterns
Data sets such as the one displayed inFigure 7.22 are unusual because theydepend on a long-term commitment
•• ••0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Annual rate of local extinctionsPerennial herbs (riverbank)
Algae (rocky intertidal)
Biennial herbs (coastal sand dunes)
Arthropods (patches of goldenrod)
   (grassy sites)
Amphibians (ponds)
Birds (forest fragments)
Small mammals (forest fragments)
Figure 7.20 Fractions of local populations
in habitat patches becoming extinct each
year. (After Fahrig & Merriam, 1994.)
trying to determine
the minimum viablepopulation . . .
. . . from biogeographic data . . .EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 209210 CHAPTER 7
to monitoring a number of populations – in this case, bighorn sheep
in desert areas of North America. If we set an arbitrary deﬁnitionof the necessary MVP as one that will give at least a 95% prob-ability of persistence for 100 years, we can explore the data onthe fate of bighorn populations to provide an approximateanswer. Populations of fewer than 50 individuals all went extinct
within 50 years whilst only 50% of populations of 51–100 sheeplasted for 50 years. Evidently, for our MVP we require more than100 individuals; in the study, such populations demonstrated closeto 100% success over the maximum period studied of 70 years.
A similar analysis of long-term records of birds on the
Californian Channel Islands indicates an MVP of between 100 and1000 pairs of birds (needed to provide a probability of persistenceof between 90 and 99% for the 80 years of the study) (Table 7.6).
Studies such as these are rare and
valuable. The long-term data are avail-
able because of the extraordinary inter-est people have in hunting (bighornsheep) and ornithology (Californian birds). Their value for con-servation, however, is limited because they deal with species that
•• ••Extinction rate (per year)10610210.0010–20.20
0.100.25
Area (km2)(c)
0.050.15
104103102100.00010.008
0.0040.010
Area (km2)(a)
0.0020.006
10210 10.00010–10.015
Area (km2)(b)
0.0050.010
10 10.0010–20.04
Area (km2)(d)
0.010.03
0.02
10–110210.010–20.4
0.20.5
Area (km2)(e)
0.10.3
102100.0010.125
0.0500.150
Area (km2)(f)
0.0250.0750.100
Figure 7.21 Percentage extinction rates as a function of habitat area for: (a) zooplankton in lakes in the northeastern USA lakes, (b) bird s
of the Californian Channel Islands, (c) birds on northern European islands, (d) vascular plants in southern Sweden, (e) birds o n Finnish
islands and (f ) birds on the islands in Gatun Lake, Panama. (Data assembled by Pimm, 1991.)
. . . is a risky
approachPersistence (%)
70 40 200105090
30
Time (years)50 6010203040607080100101+
51–10031–50
16–30
1–15
Figure 7.22 The percentage of populations of bighorn sheep 
in North America that persists over a 70-year period reduces with
initial population size. (After Berger, 1990.)Table 7.6 The relationship for a variety of bird species on the
Californian Channel Islands between initial population size andprobability of populations persisting. (After Thomas, 1990.)
Population size (pairs) Time period (years) Percentage persisting
1–10 80 61
10–100 80 90100–1000 80 991000 + 80 100EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 210ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 211
are generally not at risk. It is at our peril that we use them to
produce recommendations for management of endangeredspecies. There will be a temptation to report to a manager ‘if you have a population of more than 100 pairs of your birdspecies you are above the minimum viable threshold’. Indeed, such
a statement would not be without value. But, it will only be asafe recommendation if the species of concern and the ones inthe study are sufﬁciently similar in their vital statistics, and if the environmental regimes are similar, something that it wouldrarely be safe to assume.
7.5.5.2 Subjective expert assessment
Information that may be relevant to a
conservation crisis exists not only inthe scientiﬁc literature but also in theminds of experts. By bringing experts
together in conservation workshops, well-informed decisions
can be reached (we have already considered an example of thisapproach in the selection of overwintering reserves for monarchbutterﬂies – Section 7.2.3). To illustrate the strengths and weak-nesses of the approach when estimating extinction probability, wetake as our example the results of a workshop concerning theSumatran rhinoceros ( Dicerorhinus sumatrensis ).The species persists only in small, 
isolated subpopulations in an increas-ingly fragmented habitat in Sabah(East Malaysia), Indonesia and West Malaysia, and perhaps alsoin Thailand and Burma. Unprotected habitat is threatened by timber harvest, human resettlement and hydroelectric develop-ment. There are only a few designated reserves, which are them-selves subject to exploitation, and only two individuals wereheld in captivity at the time of the workshop.
The vulnerability of the Sumatran rhinoceros, the way this 
vulnerability varies with different management options and the
most appropriate management option given various criteria-were assessed by a technique known as decision analysis . A decision
tree is shown in Figure 7.23, based on the estimated probabilitiesof the species becoming extinct within a 30-year period (equi-valent to approximately two rhinoceros generations). The tree was constructed in the following way. The two squares are decision points: the ﬁrst distinguishes between intervention on the
rhinoceros’ behalf and nonintervention (status quo); the seconddistinguishes the various management options. For each option,the line branches at a small circle. The branches represent altern-ative scenarios that might occur, and the numbers on each branchindicate the probabilities estimated for the alternative scenarios.Thus, for the status quo option, there was estimated to be a 
•• ••in the minds of
experts: decisionanalysisthe case of theSumatran rhinoceros
0.2 Increased support
0.3 No change
0.5 Decreased support0.45
0.980.86 0.84 3.05 mControl poaching
0.6 Timber harvest
0.4 Protected0.90.370.69 1.80 mNew reserve
0.1 Dam
0.2 Timber harvest
0.7 Protected0.9
0.370.9 0.53 1.08 mExpand reserve
0.2 Disease
0.8 No disease0.950.450.55 0.60 mFencing
0.1 Success0.9 Failure
0.750.950.93 1.01 mTranslocation
0.8 Success0.2 Failure
00.950.19 3.69 mCaptive breeding0.1 Epidemic
0.9 No epidemic0.45
0.850.86 0Status quo
InterventionpE E(pE) $
Figure 7.23 Decision tree for
management of the Sumatran rhinoceros.
/H17039, decision points; /H17033, random events.
Probabilities of random events are
estimated for a 30-year period; pE,probability of species extinction within 30 years; E(pE), expected value of pE for
each alternative. Costs are present valuesof 30-year costs discounted at 4% per year;m, million. (After Maguire et al. , 1987.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 211212 CHAPTER 7
probability of 0.1 that a disease epidemic will occur in the next
30 years, and hence, a probability of 0.9 that no epidemic will occur.
If there is an epidemic, the probability of extinction (pE) is 
estimated to be 0.95 (i.e. 95% probability of extinction in 30 years),whereas with no epidemic the pE is 0.85. The overall estimate
of species extinction for an option, E(pE), is then given by:
E(pE) =probability of ﬁrst option ×pE for ﬁrst option +
probability of second option ×pE for second option,
which, in the case of the status quo option, is:
E(pE) =(0.1×0.95) +(0.9×0.85) =0.86.
The values of pE and E(pE) for the intervention options are 
calculated in a similar way. The ﬁnal column in Figure 7.23 thenlists the estimated costs of the various options.
We will consider here two of the
interventionist management optionsin a little more detail. The ﬁrst is to fencean area in an existing or new reserve,
and to manage the resulting high density of rhinoceroses with supplemental feeding and veterinary care. Disease here is amajor risk: the probability of an epidemic was estimated to behigher than in the status quo option (0.2 as opposed to 0.1)because the density would be higher. Moreover, the pE if there
was an epidemic was considered to be higher (0.95), because animals would be transferred from isolated subpopulations to thefenced area. On the other hand, if fencing were successful, thepE was expected to fall to 0.45, giving an overall E(pE) of 0.55.The fenced area would cost around US$60,000 to establish and$18,000 per year to maintain, giving a 30-year total of $0.60 million.
For the establishment of a captive breeding program, animals
would have to be captured from the wild, increasing the pE ifthe program failed to an expected 0.95. However, the pE wouldclearly drop to 0 if the program succeeded (in terms of the con-tinued persistence of the population in captivity). The cost,though, would be high, since it would involve the developmentof facilities and techniques in Malaysia and Indonesia (around $2.06million) and the extension of those that already exist in the USAand Great Britain ($1.63 million). The probability of success wasestimated to be 0.8. The overall E(pE) is therefore 0.19.
Where do these various probability values come from? The
answer is from a combination of data, the educated use of data,educated guesswork and experience with related species. Whichwould be the best management option? The answer depends onwhat criteria are used in the judgement of ‘best’. Suppose wewanted simply to minimize the chances of extinction, irrespect-ive of cost. The proposal for best option would then be captivebreeding. In practice, though, costs are most unlikely to beignored. We would then need to identify an option with anacceptably low E(pE) but with an acceptable cost.The subjective expert assessment
approach has much to commend it. 
It makes use of available data, know-ledge and experience in a situationwhen a decision is needed and time for
further research is unavailable. Moreover, it explores the vari-ous options in a systematic manner and does not duck the regret-table but inevitable truth that unlimited resources will not be available.
However, it also runs a risk. In the
absence of all necessary data, the recom-mended best option may simply bewrong. With the beneﬁt of hindsight (and in all probability some rhinoceros experts who were not part of the workshop would
have suggested this alternative outcome), we can now report thatabout $2.5 million have been spent catching Sumatran rhino-ceroses; three died during capture, six died postcapture, and ofthe 21 rhinoceroses now in captivity only one has given birth andshe was pregnant when captured (data of N. Leader-Williamsreported in Caughley, 1994). Leader-Williams suggests that $2.5million could have been used effectively to protect 700 km
2of prime
rhinoceros habitat for nearly two decades. This could in theory
hold a population of 70 Sumatran rhinoceroses which, with a rateof increase of 0.06 per individual per year (shown by otherrhinoceros species given adequate protection), might give birth
to 90 calves during that period.
7.5.5.3 A general mathematical model of population 
persistence time
At its simplest, the likely persistence
time of a population, T, can be expected
to be inﬂuenced by its size, N, its
intrinsic rate of increase, r, and the variance in rresulting from
variation in environmental conditions through time, V. Demo-
graphic uncertainty is only expected to be inﬂuential in very 
small populations; persistence time increases from a low level withpopulation size when numbers are tiny, but approaches inﬁnityat a relatively small population (dashed curve in Figure 7.24).
Various researchers have manipulated the mathematics of
population growth, allowing for uncertainty in the expression ofthe intrinsic rate of increase, to provide an explicit estimate, T, of mean time to extinction as a function of carrying capacity,
K(brieﬂy reviewed by Caughley, 1994). Making a number of
approximations (e.g. that demographic uncertainty is incon-
sequential, and that ris constant except if the population is at the
carrying capacity when ris zero), Lande (1993) has produced one
of the more accessible equations:
  TVcK
cKc
      ln =−−⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟21
•• ••evaluating
management optionsstrengths ofsubjective expertassessment . . .
. . . and weaknesses
a general modelingapproach . . .EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 212ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 213
where:
c=2r/V−1,
ris the intrinsic rate of increase and Vis the variance in rresult-
ing from variation in environmental conditions through time.
This equation is the basis for the solid curves in Figure 7.24,
which indicate that mean time to extinction is higher for larger
maximum population sizes ( K), for greater intrinsic rates of 
population growth and when environmental inﬂuences on theexpression of rare smaller. In contrast to earlier claims that ran-
dom disasters pose a greater threat than smaller environmentalvariation, it turns out that what really matters is the relationship
between the mean and variance of r(Lande, 1993; Caughley, 1994).
The relationship between persistence time and population sizecurves sharply upwards (i.e. is inﬂuential only for small or inter-mediate population sizes) if the mean rate of increase is greaterthan the variance, whereas if the variance is greater than the meanthe relationship is convex – so that, even at large population sizes,environmental uncertainty still has an inﬂuence on likely persis-tence time. This all makes intuitive good sense but can it be putto practical use?
In their study of the Tana River
crested mangabey ( Cercocebus galeritus
galeritus ) in Kenya, Kinnaird and
O’Brien (1991) used a similar equation to estimate the population
size ( K) needed to provide a 95% probability of persistence for
100 years. This endangered primate is conﬁned to the ﬂoodplainforest of a single river where it declined in numbers from 1200to 700 between 1973 and 1988 despite the creation of a reserve.
Its naturally patchy habitat has become progressively more frag-mented through agricultural expansion. The model parameters,estimated on the basis of some real population data, were takento be r=0.11 and V=0.20. The latter was particularly uncertain
because only a few years’ data were available. Substituting in themodel yielded a MVP of 8000. Using the standard rule of thumbdescribed earlier, that to avoid genetic problems an effectivepopulation size of 500 individuals is needed, an actual populationof about 5000 individuals was indicated. Given the availablehabitat it was concluded that the mangabeys could not attain a
population size of 5000–8000. Moreover, Kinnaird and O’Brienthink it unlikely that this naturally rare and restricted species everhas. Either the data were deﬁcient (e.g. environmental variationin rmay be smaller than estimated if they are able to undergo
dietary shifts in response to habitat change) or the model is toogeneral to be much use in speciﬁc cases. The latter is likely to betrue. However, this is not to deny the value of ecologists con-tinuing to search for generalizations about processes underlyingthe problems facing conservation managers.
7.5.5.4 Simulation models: population viability analysis (PVA)
Simulation models provide an altern-
ative, more speciﬁc way of gauging viability. Usually, these encapsulatesurvivorships and reproductive rates inage-structured populations. Random variations in these elements
or in Kcan be employed to represent the impact of environmental
variation, including that of disasters of speciﬁed frequency and intensity. Density dependence can be introduced where required, as can population harvesting or supplementation. In the moresophisticated models, every individual is treated separately in termsof the probability, with its imposed uncertainty, that it will sur-vive or produce a certain number of offspring in the current timeperiod. The program is run many times, each giving a differentpopulation trajectory because of the random elements involved.
The outputs, for each set of model parameters used, include estim-ates of population size each year and the probability of extinc-tion during the modeled period (the proportion of simulated populations that go extinct).
Koalas ( Phascolarctos cinereus ) are
regarded as near-threatened nation-ally, with populations in different partsof Australia varying from secure tovulnerable or extinct. The primary aimof the national management strategy is to retain viable popula-tions throughout their natural range (ANZECC, 1998). Penn et al. (2000) used a widely available demographic forecasting
tool, known as VORTEX (Lacey, 1993), to model two populations
in Queensland, one thought to be declining (at Oakey), the othersecure (at Springsure). Koala breeding commences at 2 years in
•• ••Environmental stochasticity
and disastersr > V
e
Environmental stochasticity
and disastersr < V
ePersistence time
Population sizeDemographic
stochasticity
Figure 7.24 Relationships between population persistence time
and population size, both on arbitrary scales, when the population
is subject to demographic uncertainty or to environmentaluncertainty/disasters. (After Lande, 1993.)
species-speciﬁc
approach: simulationmodeling
the case of the koalabear: identifyingpopulations atparticular risk
. . . put to the testEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 213••214 CHAPTER 7
females and 3 years in males. The other demographic values used
in the two PVAs were derived from extensive knowledge of thetwo populations and are shown in Table 7.7. Note how theOakey population had somewhat higher female mortality and fewerfemales producing young each year. The Oakey population was
modeled from 1971 and the Springsure population from 1976 (whenthe ﬁrst estimates of density were available) and the model tra-jectories were indeed declining and stable, respectively. Over the modeled period (Figure 7.25), the probability of extinction ofthe Oakey population was 0.380 (i.e. 380 out of 1000 iterationswent extinct) while that for Springsure was 0.063. Managers con-cerned with critically endangered species do not usually have theluxury of monitoring populations to check the accuracy of theirpredictions. In contrast, Penn et al. (2000) were able to compare
the predictions of their PVAs with real population trajectories,
because the koala populations have been continuously moni-tored since the 1970s (Figure 7.25). The predicted trajectories wereclose to the actual population trends, particularly for the Oakeypopulation, and this gives added conﬁdence to the modelingapproach.
The predictive accuracy of VORTEX and other simulation 
modeling tools was also found to be high for 21 long-term ani-mal data sets by Brook et al. (2000). How can such modeling be
put to management use? Local governments in New South Walesare obliged both to prepare comprehensive koala managementplans and to ensure that developers survey for potential koala habitat when a building application affects an area greater than
1 ha. Penn et al. (2000) argue that PVA modeling can be used to
determine whether any effort made to protect habitat is likely tobe rewarded by a viable population.Overall numbers of African eleph-
ants ( Loxodonta africana ) are in decline
and few populations are expected to
survive over the next few decades out-side high-security areas, mainly because
of habitat loss and poaching for ivory. For their simulation models Armbruster and Lande (1992) chose to represent the elephant population in twelve 5-year age classes through dis-crete 5-year time steps. Values for age-speciﬁc survivorship and density-dependent reproductive rates were derived from a thorough data set from Tsavo National Park in Kenya, becauseits semiarid nature has the general characteristics of land plannedfor game reserves now, and in the future. Environmental stoch-asticity, perhaps most appropriately viewed as disasters, was
modeled as drought events affecting sex- and age-speciﬁc survivor-ship – again realistic data from Tsavo were used, based on a mild drought cycle of approximately 10 years superimposed ona more severe 50-year drought and an even more severe 250-yeardrought cycle. Table 7.8 gives the survivorship of females under‘normal’ conditions and the three drought conditions. The rela-tionship between habitat area and the probability of extinctionwas examined in 1000-year simulations with and without a cullingregime. At least 1000 replicates were performed for each modelwith many more (up to 30,000) to attain acceptable statisticalconﬁdence in the smaller extinction probabilities associated withlarger habitat areas. Extinctions were taken to have occurred whenno individuals remained or when only a single sex was represented.
The results imply that an area of 1300 km
2(500 sq. miles) is
required to yield a 99% probability of persistence for 1000 years
(Figure 7.26). This conservative outcome was chosen because of
••Variable Oakey Springsure
Maximum age 12 12
Sex ratio (proportion male) 0.575 0.533Litter size of 0 (%) 57.00 ( ±17.85) 31.00 ( ±15.61)
Litter size of 1 (%) 43.00 ( ±17.85) 69.00 ( ±15.61)
Female mortality at age 0 32.50 ( ±3.25) 30.00 ( ±3.00)
Female mortality at age 1 17.27 ( ±1.73) 15.94 ( ±1.59)
Adult female mortality 9.17 ( ±0.92) 8.47 ( ±0.85)
Male mortality at age 0 20.00 ( ±2.00) 20.00 ( ±2.00)
Male mortality at age 1 22.96 ( ±2.30) 22.96 ( ±2.30)
Male mortality at age 2 22.96 ( ±2.30) 22.96 ( ±2.30)
Adult male mortality 26.36 ( ±2.64) 26.36 ( ±2.64)
Probability of catastrophe 0.05 0.05Multiplier, for reproduction 0.55 0.55Multiplier for survival 0.63 0.63% males in breeding pool 50 50Initial population size 46 20Carrying capacity, K 70 (±7) 60 ( ±6)Table 7.7 Values used as inputs for
simulations of koala populations at Oakey
(declining) and Springsure (secure),Australia. Values in brackets are standarddeviations due to environmental variation;
the model procedure involves the selectionof values at random from the range.Catastrophes are assumed to occur with a certain probability; in years when themodel selects a catastrophe, reproductionand survival are reduced by the multipliersshown. (After Penn et al., 2000.)
the case of the
African elephant –necessary size ofreserves?EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 214••ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 215
••Female survivorship
Age class (years) Normal years 10-year droughts 50-year droughts 250-year droughts
0–5 0.500 0.477 0.250 0.01
5–10 0.887 0.877 0.639 0.15
10–15 0.884 0.884 0.789 0.2015–20 0.898 0.898 0.819 0.2020–25 0.905 0.905 0.728 0.2025–30 0.883 0.883 0.464 0.1030–35 0.881 0.881 0.475 0.1035–40 0.875 0.875 0.138 0.0540–45 0.857 0.857 0.405 0.1045–50 0.625 0.625 0.086 0.0150–55 0.400 0.400 0.016 0.0155–60 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.00Table 7.8 Survivorship for 12 elephant
age classes in normal years (occur in 
47% of 5-year periods), and in years with10-year droughts (41% of 5-year periods), 50-year and 250-year droughts (10 and 
2% of 5-year periods, respectively). (AfterArmbruster & Lande, 1992.)60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 19811983 1985 1987 1989 1991
1993 1995 1997No. of koalasObserved
VORTEX(a)
(b)
1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 199660
50
40
30
20
10
0No. of koalas
No. of koalasFigure 7.25 Observed koala population
trends ( /H17004) compared with trajectories 
(/H17009± 1 SD) predicted by 1000 iterations of
VORTEX at (a) Oakey and (b) Springsure,
USA. (After Penn et al. , 2000.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 215216 CHAPTER 7
the difﬁculty of reestablishing viable populations in isolated areas
where extinctions have occurred and because of the elephant’slong generation time (about 31 years). In fact, the authors recom-mend to managers an even more conservative minimum area of2600 km
2(1000 sq. miles) for reserves. The data are least reliable
for survivorship in the youngest age class and for the long-termdrought regime, and a ‘sensitivity analysis’ shows extinctionprobability to be particularly sensitive to slight variations inthese parameters. Of the parks and game reserves in Central and
Southern Africa, only 35% are larger than 2600 km
2.Many aspects of the life history of
plants present particular challenges 
for simulation modeling, including seeddormancy, highly periodic recruitmentand clonal growth (Menges, 2000).However, as with endangered animals, different management sce-narios can be usefully simulated in PVAs. The royal catchﬂy, Silene
regia , is a long-lived iteroparous prairie perennial whose range has
shrunk dramatically. Menges and Dolan (1998) collected demo-
graphic data for up to 7 years from 16 midwestern USA popula-tions (adult population sizes of 45–1302) subject to differentmanagement regimes. The species has high survivorship, slowgrowth, frequent ﬂowering and nondormant seeds, but veryepisodic recruitment (most populations in most years fail to pro-duce seedlings). Matrices, such as that illustrated in Table 7.9, wereproduced for individual populations and years. Multiple simula-tions were then run for every matrix to determine the ﬁnite rateof increase ( λ; see Section 4.7) and the probability of extinction
in 1000 years. Figure 7.27 shows the median ﬁnite rate ofincrease for the 16 populations, grouped into cases where particular
management regimes were in place, for years when recruitmentof seedlings occurred and for years when it did not. All sites whereλwas greater than 1.35 when recruitment took place were man-
aged by burning and some by mowing as well; none of these werepredicted to go extinct during the modeled period. On the other
hand, populations with no manage ment, or whose management
did not include ﬁre, had lower values for λand all except two
had predicted extinction probabil ities (over 1000 years) of from
10 to 100%. The obvious management recommendation is to use
prescribed burning to provide opportunities for seedling recruit-ment. Low establishment rates of seedlings in the ﬁeld may bedue to frugivory by rodents or ants and/or competition for lightwith established vegetation (Menges & Dolan, 1998) – burnt
•• ••Cumulative extinction probability
1000 600 2000.000100.0010.11
400
Time (years)8001000 miles20.01
500 miles2200 miles2100 miles250 miles220 miles2
Figure 7.26 Cumulative probability of elephant population
extinction over 1000 years for six habitat areas (without culling).
(After Armbruster & Lande, 1992.)
Table 7.9 An example of a projection matrix for a particular Silene regia population from 1990 to 1991, assuming recruitment. Numbers
represent the proportion changing from the stage in the column to the stage in the row (bold values represent plants remaining in the
same stage). ‘Alive undeﬁned’ represents individuals with no size or ﬂowering data, usually as a result of mowing or herbivory.  Numbers
in the top row are seedlings produced by ﬂowering plants. The ﬁnite rate of increase λfor this population is 1.67. The site is managed by
prescribed burning. (After Menges & Dolan, 1998.)
Seedling Vegetative Small ﬂowering Medium ﬂowering Large ﬂowering Alive undeﬁned
Seedling – – 5.32 12.74 30.88 –
Vegetative 0.308 0.111 00 0 0
Small ﬂowering 0 0.566 0.506 0.137 0.167 0.367
Medium ﬂowering 0 0.111 0.210 0.608 0.167 0.300
Large ﬂowering 0 0 0.012 0.039 0.667 0.167
Alive undeﬁned 0 0.222 0.198 0.196 0 0.133the case of the 
royal catchﬂy:management of anendangered plantEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 216ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 217
areas probably reduce one or both of these negative effects.
While management regime was by far the best predictor of persistence, it is of interest that populations with higher geneticdiversity also had higher median values for λ.
In an ideal world, a PVA would
enable us to produce a speciﬁc and
reliable recommendation for an endan-gered species of the population size, orreserve area, that would permit persis-
tence for a given period with a given level of probability. But thisis rarely achievable because the biological data are hardly evergood enough. The modelers know this and it is important thatconservation managers also appreciate it. Within the inevitableconstraints of lack of knowledge and lack of time and oppor-
tunity to gather data, the model building exercise is no more norless than a rationalization of the problem and quantiﬁcation ofideas. Moreover, even though such models produce quantitativeoutputs, common sense tells us to trust the results only in a qual-itative fashion. Nevertheless, the examples above show how, onthe basis of ecological theory discussed in Chapters 4–6, we canconstruct models that allow us to make the very best use of avail-able data and may well give us the conﬁdence to make a choicebetween various possible management options and to identify the relative importance of factors that put a population at risk (Reed et al., 2003). The sorts of management interventions that
may then be recommended include translocation of individualsto augment target populations, creating larger reserves, raising
the carrying capacity by artiﬁcial feeding, restricting dispersal by
fencing, fostering of young (or cross-fostering of young by relatedspecies), reducing mortality by controlling predators or poachers,or through vaccination and, of course, habitat preservation.
7.5.6 Conservation of metapopulations
We noted in Section 7.5.4 that local
extinctions are common events. It fol-lows that conservation biologists needto be aware of the critical importanceof recolonization of habitat fragments
if fragmented populations are to persist. Thus, we need to payparticular attention to the relationships amongst landscape ele-ments, including dispersal corridors, in relation to the dispersalcharacteristics of focal species (Fahrig & Merriam, 1994).
Westphal et al. (2003) built a stoch-
astic patch occupancy model for thecritically endangered southern emu-wren ( Stipiturus malachurus intermedius )
(based on realistic extinction and recol-
onization matrices) and then used atechnique known as stochastic dynamic modeling to ﬁnd optimalsolutions for its future management. The metapopulation in theMount Lofty ranges of South Australia occurs in six remainingpatches of dense swamp habitat (Figure 7.28). Emu-wrens are poorﬂyers and interpatch corridors of appropriate vegetation arelikely to be important for metapopulation persistence. The man-agement strategies that Westphal et al. (2003) evaluated were the
enlargement of existing patches, linking patches via corridorsand creating a new patch (Figure 7.28). The ‘cost’ of each strat-egy was standardized to be equivalent to 0.9 ha of revegetatedarea. The optimization modeling checked among individualmanagement actions, and also compared a variety of management
scenario trajectories (e.g. ﬁrst build a corridor from the largestpatch to its neighbor, then, in the next time period, enlarge thelargest patch; then create a new patch, etc.), to ﬁnd those thatreduced the 30-year extinction risk to the greatest extent.
Optimal metapopulation management decisions depended
on the current state of the population. For example, if only thetwo smallest patches were occupied, the optimal single action wouldbe to enlarge one of them (patch 2; strategy E2). However, whenonly a more extinction-resistant large patch is occupied, connectingit to neighboring patches is optimal (strategy C5). The best of these ﬁxed strategies reduced the 30-year extinction probabilitiesby up to 30%. On the other hand, the optimal state-dependentstrategies, where chains of different actions were taken over suc-cessive time periods, reduced extinction probabilities by 50–80%compared to no-management models. The optimal scenario trajectories varied according to the starting state of the meta-population and are shown in Figure 7.29.
•• ••0.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.8Median finite rate of increase
Fire and mowing Fire
Management regimeNo fire
Figure 7.27 Median ﬁnite rates of increase of Silene regia
populations as a function of management regime, for years 
with seedling recruitment ( /H17033) and without ( 1). Unburned
management regimes include just mowing, herbicide use or no management.
value and limits of
population viabilityanalysisaddingmetapopulationstructure
the case of thesouthern emu-wren:comparing the cost ofdifferent strategiesEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 217218 CHAPTER 7
These results hold a number of lessons for conservation 
managers. First, optimal decisions are highly state dependent, 
relying on knowledge of patch occupancy and a good understand-ing of extinction and recolonization rates. Second, the sequenceof actions is critical and recognition of an optimal sequence 
can only be underpinned by an approach such as stochasticdynamic modeling (Clark & Mangel, 2000); it will be hard to come up with simple rules of thumb about metapopulationmanagement. Most important of all is the point that funds available for conservation will always be limited and tools such as these should help achieve the optimal use of scarceresources.
7.6 Global climate change and management
Given predicted increases in carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gases,temperature is expected to increase by between 1.4 and 5.8°C from 1990 levels by the year 2100 (IPCC, 2001).
The effects of such increases can be
expected to be profound, through a melting of glaciers and icecaps and the consequent raising of sea level, and more generallythrough large-scale changes to the global climate. Alterations to temperature, and other aspects of climate, provide a shiftingphysicochemical template upon which species’ niches will besuperimposed in future. In other words, nature reserves alreadyset up for key species may be in the wrong places and species 
currently appropriate for restoration projects may no longer suc-ceed. Moreover, each region of the world is likely to be subjectto a new set of invaders, pests and diseases.
Political approaches to the mitigation of climate change focus
on international efforts to reduce emissions and to augment 
ecological sinks (e.g. by increasing the amount of the world’s surface that is forest). We deal with these aspects in Chapter 22.Here we focus on predicting the effects of climate change on thespread of diseases and other invasive species (Section 7.6.1) anddeciding where to locate nature reserves in a changing world(Section 7.6.2).
7.6.1 Predicting the spread of diseases and other
invaders in a changing world
We are only at an early stage of pro-
jected trends in global climate changebut already there is evidence of re-sponses by the ﬂora and fauna. Thus,shoot production and ﬂowering of a
variety of plants is happening earlier, many birds, butterﬂies andamphibians are breeding earlier, and shifts in species’ rangeshave been detected both polewards and towards higher altitudes(Walther et al. , 2002; Parmesan & Yohe, 2003). We can expect
much more dramatic changes in the potential ranges of both nativeand invasive species in the coming century.
•• ••N
Relative patch sizes:
5>1>6>4>2>3Largest  patch New  patch (E7)(1.6 ha)
4
C5
C55
(10.1 ha)
6
(5.2 ha)(1.4 ha)
2
3
(0.9 ha)
C2 C21
(8.4 ha)
Most connected patch
Strategies:
  Enlarge patch 2 (E2)  Enlarge patch 5 (E5)  Patch creation and corridor (E7)  Corridor 1 (C2)  Corridor 2 (C5)
0.5 1 km 0Corridor 5 (C5)
Corridor 2 (C2)
Corridor 3 (with creation of patch E7)
Figure 7.28 The southern emu-wren
metapopulation, showing the size and
location of patches and corridors. Forfurther details, see text. (After Westphal et al. , 2003.)
climate change
models predict ashifting geographictemplate of abioticfactors . . .. . . which will bereﬂected in newpatterns of invaderriskEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 218ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 219
Dengue fever is a potentially fatal
viral disease currently limited to trop-
ical and subtropical countries where itsmosquito vectors occur. No mosquitospecies currently in New Zealand appears to be capable of carry-ing the disease. Worldwide, the two most important vectors areAedes aegypti and A. albopictus . Both have been intercepted at New
Zealand’s borders and the latter, which is tolerant of somewhat
•• ••Baseline
(a)  Only largest patch occupied
C5
E5 E2E7
DN
E5
E7
C2
E2
E2
E5C5 C2
E2(b)  Only two smallest patches occupied
DN
E2C5 E2(c)  All patches occupied
E5
C2E7 DN
E2 C5(d)  Only two largest patches occupied
E2E5 E2
E7 DNStrategies:
E5, enlarge the largest patchE2, enlarge most connected
     (smaller) patch
C2, 
corridor from most connected
      patch to neighbors
C5, corridor from largest      patch to neighbors
E7, create new patch and
      subsequently enlargeDN, do nothing, not significantly      worse than any strategyFigure 7.29 The optimal management
scenario trajectories for different starting
conﬁgurations of the southern emu-wrenmetapopulation. Each circle represents one action. Concentric circles show the
repeated execution of a strategy before thenext strategy is implemented. Note thateach trajectory ends with a do-nothingaction when the metapopulation state issuch that lack of management action doesnot produce a probability of extinction thatis signiﬁcantly worse than any activestrategy. (After Westphal et al. , 2003.)
the case of
mosquitoes anddengue feverEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 219••220 CHAPTER 7
colder conditions, has recently invaded Italy and North America.
If a vector mosquito population becomes established, it needs only a single virus-carrying human traveler to trigger an outbreakof the disease. de Wet et al. (2001) used knowledge of the funda-
mental niches of the two mosquito species in their natural ranges
(in terms of temperature and precipitation), coupled with climatechange scenarios, to predict areas of high risk of invasion of thevector and establishment of the disease. Under present climaticconditions, A. aegypti is unlikely to be able to establish anywhere
in New Zealand whereas A. albopictus could invade the northern
part of North Island (Figure 7.30a). Under a climate change scenario at the more extreme end of what has been predicted,most of North Island and some of South Island would be at riskof invasion by A. albopictus . Under the same scenario, the greater
Auckland area in the north of North Island, where a large propor-
tion of the human population lives, would become susceptible toinvasion by the more efﬁcient virus vector A. aegypti (Figure 7.30b).
Vigilant border surveillance is vital, with most emphasis on
northern ports of entry, in particular Auckland (with 75% of 
air passenger arrivals, 74% of bulk shipping cargo and 50% of 
the imported tyres that provide a prime transport route for
mosquito larvae) (Hearnden et al. , 1999).
Spiny acacia ( Acacia nilotic subspecies
indica ) is a woody legume whose native
range encompasses parts of Africa and extends as far east as India. It hasinvaded many parts of the world, including Australia where it was originally introduced for shade, fodder and ornamental purposes. It has spread widely and is now considered a noxiousweed because it reduces pasture production and impedes stock
mustering and access to water. On the basis of conditions in itsnatural range, Kriticos et al. (2003) ﬁrst determined the species’
••(a)( i)
(b)( i)(ii)
(ii)Ocean
1 – Marginal2
3
45 – Moderate6
7
8910 – Optimum
Figure 7.30 Dengue fever risk maps for:
(a) Aedes albopictus for (i) present climatic
conditions and (ii) for a high-range climate
change scenario for 2100, and (b) A. aegypti
for (i) a high-range climate change scenario
for (i) 2050 and (ii) 2100. (After de Wet et al. , 2001.)the case of invasive
acaciasEIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 220••ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 221
fundamental niche in terms of lower and upper tolerance limits
and optima for temperature and moisture, and the thresholds forcold stress, heat stress, dry stress and wet stress (water-logging).They then modeled the invasive potential of spiny acacia undertwo climate change scenarios. Both assumed a 2°C temperature
rise, coupled with either a 10% increase or 10% decrease in rain-fall, because there is considerable uncertainty about the effects ofglobal change on precipitation in Australia (Figure 7.31). The actualcurrent distribution of spiny acacia is widespread within therange indicated by the model, but it has not yet spread to all predicted areas. When climate change is taken into account, itseventual invaded range should be much greater, particularlybecause the plant is expected to become more efﬁcient in its useof water as a result of a fertilization effect of increased atmospheric
carbon dioxide. Thus elevated atmospheric concentration can haveboth indirect effects, via climate change, and direct effects on the performance and distribution of plants (Volk et al., 2000). Further
spread of this species should be containable because trees can bephysically removed and the spread of seeds (in stock feces) canbe prevented as long as animals are not moved indiscriminately.A crucial component in containing the invasion will be raising public awareness of the weed and how to control it (Kriticos et al. , 2003).
7.6.2 Managing endangered species
Temperature and moisture also strongly
inﬂuence the life cycle of butterﬂies.Beaumont and Hughes (2002) used theapproach applied to spiny acacia aboveto predict the effect of climate change
on the distribution of 24 Australian butterﬂy species. Under 
even a moderate set of future conditions (temperature increaseof 0.8–1.4°C by 2050), the distributions of 13 of the speciesdecreased by more than 20%. Most at risk are those, such asHypochrysops halyetus , that not only have specialized food-plant
requirements but also depend on the presence of ants for amutualistic relationship. The models suggest that H. halyetus ,
which is restricted to coastal heathland in Western Australia, willlose 58–99% of its current climatic range. Moreover, less than 27%
of its predicted future distribution occurs in locations that it 
••Figure 7.31 (right ) The predicted distribution of spiny acacia in
Australia on the basis of (a) current climate, (b) a scenario with 
an average 2°C increase and a 10% increase in precipitation, and (c) a 2°C increase and a 10% decrease in precipitation. Thepredicted distributions in (b) and (c) also assume an increased
efﬁciency of water use by spiny acacia because of a fertilizingeffect of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide. (After Kriticos et al. , 2003.)(a)
(c)(b)Unsuitable
MarginalSuitable
Highly suitable
global climate
change: will naturereserves be in theright place?EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 221222 CHAPTER 7
currently occupies. This result highlights a general point for
managers: regional conservation efforts and current nature reservesmay turn out to be in the wrong place in a changing world.
Téllez-Valdés and Dávila-Aranda (2003) explored this issue for
cacti, the dominant plant form in Mexico’s Tehuacán-Cuicatlán
Biosphere Reserve. From knowledge of the biophysical basis ofthe distribution of current species and assuming one of three futureclimate scenarios, they predicted future species’ distributions inrelation to the location of the reserve. Table 7.10 shows how thepotential ranges of species contracted or expanded in the variousscenarios. Focusing on the most extreme scenario (an average temperature increase of 2.0°C and a 15% reduction in rainfall),it is evident that more than half of the species that are currentlyrestricted to the reserve are predicted to go extinct. A second cat-
egory of cacti, whose current ranges are almost equally withinand outside the reserve, are expected to contract their ranges, butin such a way that their distributions become almost completelyconﬁned to the reserve. A ﬁnal category, whose current distributionsare much more widespread, also suffer range contraction but infuture they are expected to still be distributed within and outsidethe reserve. In the case of these cacti, then, the location of thereserve seems to cater adequately for potential range changes.We noted above that the performance of the butterﬂy
Hypochrysops halyetus depends not just on its own physiology and
behavior but also on a mutualistic interaction with ants. More-
over, while cactus distributions are fundamentally dependent onappropriate physicochemical conditions, they are also certain to
be inﬂuenced by competition for resources with other plants andby their interactions with the species that feed upon them. Wenow turn our attention, in the second section of the book, to theecology of interacting populations.
Summary
Ecologists and managers need to identify effective ways to apply
ecological knowledge to deal with the wide range of environmentalproblems that confront us all. In this chapter we discuss ecolog-ical applications of theory and knowledge at the level of indi-vidual organisms and of single populations. This is the ﬁrst of 
a trio of chapters; the others will address, in a similar manner,the application of the fundamentals of ecology at the level of population interactions (Chapter 15) and of communities andecosystems (Chapter 22).
•• ••Current +1.0°C +2.0°C +2.0°C
Species category climate −10% rain −10% rain −15% rain
Restricted to the reserve
Cephalocereus columna-trajani 138 27 0 0
Ferocactus ﬂavovirens 317 532 100 55
Mammillaria huitzilopochtli 68 21 0 0
Mammillaria pectinifera 5,130 1,124 486 69
Pachycereus hollianus 175 87 0 0
Polaskia chende 157 83 76 41
Polaskia chichipe 387 106 10 0
Intermediate distributionCoryphantha pycnantha 1,367 2,881 1,088 807
Echinocactus platyacanthus f. grandis 1,285 1,046 230 1,148
Ferocactus haematacanthus 340 1,979 1,220 170
Pachycereus weberi 2,709 3,492 1,468 1,012
Widespread distributionCoryphantha pallida 10,237 5,887 3,459 2,920
Ferocactus recurvus 3,220 3,638 1,651 151
Mammillaria dixanthocentron 9,934 7,126 5,177 3,162
Mammillaria polyedra 10,118 5,512 3,473 2,611
Mammillaria sphacelata 3,956 5,440 2,803 2,580
Neobuxbaumia macrocephala 2,846 4,943 3,378 1,964
Neobuxbaumia tetetzo 2,964 1,357 519 395
Pachycereus chrysacanthus 1,395 1,929 872 382
Pachycereus fulviceps 3,306 5,405 2,818 1,071Table 7.10 The potential core
distributions (km2) of cacti under current
climatic conditions and for three climate
change scenarios for Mexico. Species in the ﬁrst category of cacti are currentlycompletely restricted to the 10,000 km
2
Tehuacán–Cuicatlán Biosphere Reserve.Those in the second category have acurrent range more or less equallydistributed within and outside the reserve.The current ranges of species in the ﬁnal
category extend widely beyond the reserveboundaries. (After Téllez-Valdés & Dávila-Aranda, 2003.)EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 222ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS AT THE LEVEL OF ORGANISMS AND SINGLE-SPECIES POPULATIONS 223
Management strategies often rely on an ability to predict
where species might do well, whether we wish to revegetate con-
taminated land, restore degraded animal habitats, predict thefuture distribution of invasive species (and through biosecuritymeasures prevent their arrival) or conserve endangered species
in new reserves. We describe how our understanding of nichetheory provides a vital foundation for many management actions.
The life history of a species is another basic feature that can
guide management. Particular combinations of ecological traitshelp determine lifetime patterns of fecundity and survival, whichin turn determine the distribution and abundance of species inspace and time. We consider whether particular traits (such asseed size, growth rate, longevity and behavioral ﬂexibility) canbe of use to managers concerned with the likelihood of a species
being a successful part of a habitat restoration project, a problematicinvader or a candidate for extinction and therefore worthy of conservation priority. Body size turns out to be a particularly important indicator of extinction risk.
A particularly inﬂuential feature of the behavior of organisms,
whether animals or plants, is their pattern of movement and dispersion. Knowledge of migratory behavior and dispersion be-havior in a patchy environment can underpin attempts to restoredamaged and suboptimal habitats and in the design of conserva-tion reserves. Moreover, a detailed understanding of patterns ofspecies transmission by human agency permits us to predict and
counter the spread of invaders.
Conservation of endangered species requires a thorough
understanding of the dynamics of small populations. Theory tellsconservation biologists to beware genetic problems in small 
populations, which needs to be taken into account when devis-ing conservation management plans. Small populations are alsosubject to particular demographic risks that make extinctionmore likely. We focus on an approach called population viabil-ity analysis (PVA) – an assessment of extinction probabilities thatdepends on knowledge of life tables, population rates of increase,intraspeciﬁc competition, density dependence, carrying capacitiesand, when appropriate, metapopulation structure. Careful ana-lysis of populations of particular species at risk can be used to 
suggest management approaches with the greatest chance ofensuring their persistence.
One of the biggest future challenges to organisms, ecologists
and resource managers is global climate change. We deal withthe way we can use knowledge about the ecology of individualorganisms, coupled with predicted global changes in patterns in physicochemical conditions across the face of the globe, to predict and manage the spread of disease-carrying organisms and other invaders, and to determine the appropriate positioningof conservation reserves.
•• ••EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 223••EIPC07  10/24/05  1:56 PM  Page 224••Introduction
The activity of any organism changes the environment in which
it lives. It may alter conditions, as when the transpiration of a treecools the atmosphere, or it may add or subtract resources fromthe environment that might have been available to other organ-isms, as when that tree shades the plants beneath it. In addition,
though, organisms interact when individuals enter into the lives ofothers. In the following chapters (8–15) we consider the varietyof these interactions between individuals of different species. Wedistinguish ﬁve main categories: competition, predation, parasitism,mutualism and detritivory, although like most biological categories,these ﬁve are not perfect pigeon-holes.
In very broad terms, ‘competition’ is an interaction in which
one organism consumes a resource that would have been avail-able to, and might have been consumed by, another. One organ-
ism deprives another, and, as a consequence, the other organismgrows more slowly, leaves fewer progeny or is at greater risk ofdeath. The act of deprivation can occur between two membersof the same species or between individuals of different species.We have already examined intra speciﬁc competition in Chapter 5.
We turn to interspeciﬁc competition in Chapter 8.
Chapters 9 and 10 deal with various aspects of ‘predation’,
though we have deﬁned predation broadly. We have combinedthose situations in which one organism eats another and kills it(such as an owl preying on mice), and those in which the consumertakes only part of its prey, which may then regrow to provideanother bite another day (grazing). We have also combined herbivory (animals eating plants) and carnivory (animals eating
animals). In Chapter 9 we examine the nature of predation, i.e.what happens to the predator and what happens to the prey, pay-ing particular attention to herbivory because of the subtleties thatcharacterize the response of a plant to attack. We also discuss the
behavior of predators. Then, in Chapter 10, we examine the ‘con-sequences of consumption’ in terms of the dynamics of predatorand prey populations. This is the part of ecology that has the mostobvious relevance to those concerned with the management ofnatural resources: the efﬁciency of harvesting (whether of ﬁsh,whales, grasslands or prairies) and the biological and chemical con-
trol of pests and weeds – themes that we take up in Chapter 15.
Most of the processes in this section involve genuine inter-
actions between organisms of different species. However, when 
dead organisms (or dead parts of organisms) are consumed –decomposition and detritivory – the affair is far more one-sided. None the less, as we describe in Chapter 11, these processes themselves incorporate competition, parasitism, predation andmutualism: microcosms of all the major ecological processes
(except photosynthesis).
Chapter 12, ‘Parasitism and Disease’, deals with a subject that
in the past was often neglected by ecologists – and by ecologytexts. Yet more than half of all species are parasites, and recentyears have seen much of that past neglect rectiﬁed. Parasitism itselfhas blurred edges, particularly where it merges into predation.But whereas a predator usually takes all or part of many individualprey, a parasite normally takes its resources from one or a veryfew hosts, and (like many grazing predators) it rarely kills its hostsimmediately, if at all.
Whereas the earlier chapters of this section deal largely 
with conﬂict between species, Chapter 13 is concerned withmutualistic interactions, in which both organisms experience a netbeneﬁt. None the less, as we shall see, conﬂict often lies at the
heart of mutualistic interactions too: each participant exploitingthe other, such that the netbeneﬁt arises only because, overall,
gains exceed losses. Like parasitism, the ecology of mutualism 
Part 2
Species Interactions
EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 225226 PART 2
of amensalism may occur when one organism produces its ill effect
(for instance a toxin) whether or not the potentially affectedorganism is present.
Although the earlier chapters in this section deal with these
various interactions largely in isolation, members of a population
are subject simultaneously to many such interactions, often of all conceivable types. Thus, the abundance of a population is determined by this range of interactions (and indeed environ-mental conditions and the availability of resources) all acting inconcert. Attempts to understand variations in abundance there-fore demand an equally wide ranging perspective. We adopt thisapproach in Chapter 14.
Finally in this section, we discuss in Chapter 15 applications
of the principles elaborated in the preceding chapters. Our focus
is on pest control and the management of natural resources. Withthe former, the pest species is either a competitor or a predatorof desirable species (for example food crops), and we are eitherpredators of the pest ourselves or we manipulate its naturalpredators to our advantage (biological control). With the latter,again, we are predators of a living, natural resource (harvestabletrees in a forest, ﬁsh in the sea), but the challenge for us is to estab-lish a stable and sustainable relationship with the prey, guarant-eeing further valuable harvests for generations to come.
••has often been neglected. Again, though, this neglect has been
unwarranted: the greater part of the world’s biomass is composedof mutualists.
Ecologists have often summarized interactions between
organisms by a simple code that represents each one of the pair
of interacting organisms by a ‘ +’, a ‘−’ or a ‘0’, depending on how
it is affected by the interaction. Thus, a predator–prey (includinga herbivore–plant) interaction, in which the predator beneﬁts andthe prey is harmed, is denoted by +−, and a parasite–host inter-
action is also clearly +−. Another straightforward case is mutu-
alism, which, overall, is obviously ++; whereas if organisms do
not interact at all, we can denote this by 0 0 (sometimes called‘neutralism’). Detritivory must be denoted by +0, since the
detritivore itself beneﬁts, while its food (dead already) is unaffected.
The general term applied to +0 interactions is ‘commensalism’,
but paradoxically this term is not usually used for detritivores.Instead, it is reserved for cases, allied to parasitism, in which oneorganism (the ‘host’) provides resources or a home for anotherorganism, but in which the host itself suffers no tangible illeffects. Competition is usually described as a −− interaction, 
but it is often impossible to establish that both organisms areharmed. Such asymmetric interactions may then approximate toa – 0 classiﬁcation, generally referred to as ‘amensalism’. True casesEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 226••8.1 Introduction
The essence of interspeciﬁc competition is that individuals of one
species suffer a reduction in fecundity, growth or survivorship asa result of resource exploitation or interference by individuals ofanother species. This competition is likely to affect the popula-tion dynamics of the competing species, and the dynamics, in their
turn, can inﬂuence the species’ distributions and their evolution.Of course, evolution, in itsturn, can inﬂuence the species’ dis-
tributions and dynamics. Here, we concentrate on the effects ofcompetition on populations of species, whilst Chapter 19 exam-ines the role of interspeciﬁc competition (along with predationand parasitism) in shaping the structure of ecological commun-ities. There are several themes introduced in this chapter that are taken up and discussed more fully in Chapter 20. The twochapters should be read together for a full coverage of interspeciﬁc
competition.
8.2 Some examples of interspeciﬁc competition
There have been many studies of inter-
speciﬁc competition between species ofall kinds. We have chosen six initially,to illustrate a number of important ideas.
8.2.1 Competition between salmonid ﬁshes
Salvelinus malma (Dolly Varden charr)
and S. leucomaenis (white-spotted charr)
are morphologically similar and closely
related ﬁshes in the family Salmonidae. The two species arefound together in many streams on Hokkaido Island in Japan, 
but Dolly Varden are distributed at higher altitudes (furtherupstream) than white-spotted charr, with a zone of overlap at 
intermediate altitudes. In streams where one species happens tobe absent, the other expands its range, indicating that the dis-tributions may be maintained by competition (i.e. each species
suffers, and is thus excluded from certain sites, in the presence of the other species). Water temperature, an abiotic factor withprofound consequences for ﬁsh ecology (discussed already inSection 2.4.4), increases downstream.
By means of experiments in artiﬁcial streams, Taniguchi 
and Nakano (2000) showed that when either species was testedalone, higher temperatures led to increased aggression. But this effect was reversed for Dolly Varden when in the presenceof white-spotted charr (Figure 8.1a). Reﬂecting this, at the highertemperature, Dolly Varden were suppressed from obtainingfavorable foraging positions when white-spotted charr were present, and they suffered lower growth rates (Figure 8.1b, c) and a lower probability of survival.
Thus, the experiments lend support to the idea that Dolly
Varden and white-spotted charr compete: one species, at least,
suffers directly from the presence of the other. They coexist inthe same river, but on a ﬁner scale their distributions overlap verylittle. Speciﬁcally, the white-spotted charr appear to outcompeteand exclude Dolly Varden from downstream locations in the lat-ter’s range. The reason for the upper boundary of white-spottedcharr remains unknown as they did not suffer from the presenceof Dolly Varden at the lower temperature.
8.2.2 Competition between barnacles
The second study concerns two species
of barnacle in Scotland: Chthamalus stel-
latus and Balanus balanoides (Figure 8.2)
(Connell, 1961). These are frequentlyfound together on the same Atlantic rocky shores of northwesta diversity of
examples ofcompetition . . .
. . . betweensalmonid ﬁshes, . . .
. . . betweenbarnacles, . . .
Chapter 8
Interspecific CompetitionEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 227228 CHAPTER 8
Europe. However, adult Chthamalus generally occur in an inter-
tidal zone that is higher up the shore than that of adult Balanus ,
even though young Chthamalus settle in considerable numbers in
the Balanus zone. In an attempt to understand this zonation, Connell
monitored the survival of young Chthamalus in the Balanus zone.
He took successive censuses of mapped individuals over the
period of 1 year and, most importantly, he ensured at some sitesthat young Chthamalus that settled in the Balanus zone were kept
free from contact with Balanus . In contrast with the normal pat-
tern, such individuals survived well, irrespective of the intertidallevel. Thus, it seemed that the usual cause of mortality in young
Chthamalus was not the increased submergence times of the
lower zones, but competition from Balanus in those zones.
Direct observation conﬁrmed that Balanus smothered, undercut
or crushed Chthamalus , and the greatest Chthamalus mortality
occurred during the seasons of most rapid Balanus growth.
Moreover, the few Chthamalus individuals that survived 1 year of
Balanus crowding were much smaller than uncrowded ones,
showing, since smaller barnacles produce fewer offspring, that inter-
speciﬁc competition was also reducing fecundity.
•• ••(a)Aggressive frequency (no. 2 min–1)
High Low012Sympatry
High Low012Allopatry
a
bc
aabc
a
Temperature treatment(b)
Foraging frequency (no. 2 min–1)
High Low012
High Low012
aab
aabc
a
b
(c)Specific growth rate (day–1)
High Low00.10.2
High Low00.10.2
a
cd
b
a
aaaS. malma
S. leucomaenis
Figure 8.1 (a) Frequency of aggressive
encounters initiated by individuals of each
ﬁsh species during a 72-day experiment in artiﬁcial stream channels with tworeplicates each of 50 Dolly Varden
(Salvelinus malma ) or 50 white-spotted 
charr ( S. leucomaenis ) alone (allopatry) or 
25 of each species together (sympatry). (b) Foraging frequency. (c) Speciﬁc growthrate in length. Different letters indicate that the means are signiﬁcantly differentfrom each other. (From Taniguchi &Nakano, 2000.)EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 228INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 229
Thus, Balanus and Chthamalus compete. They coexist on the
same shore but, like the ﬁsh in the previous section, on a ﬁner
scale their distributions overlap very little. Balanus outcompetes
and excludes Chthamalus from the lower zones; but Chthamalus
can survive in the upper zones where Balanus , because of its 
comparative sensitivity to desiccation, cannot.
8.2.3 Competition between bedstraws ( Galium spp.)
A. G. Tansley, one of the greatest of the ‘founding fathers’ of plant ecology,studied competition between two spe-
cies of bedstraw (Tansley, 1917). Galium hercynicum is a species
which grows naturally in Great Britain at acidic sites, whilst 
G. pumilum is conﬁned to more calcareous soils. Tansley found
in experiments that as long as he grew them alone, both specieswould thrive on both the acidic soil from a G. hercynicum site 
and the calcareous soil from a G. pumilum site. Yet, if the species
were grown together, only G. hercynicum grew successfully in 
the acidic soil and only G. pumilum grew successfully in the cal-
careous soil. It seems, therefore, that when they grow togetherthe species compete, and that one species wins, whilst the otherloses so badly that it is competitively excluded from the site. 
The outcome depends on the habitat in which the competitionoccurs.8.2.4 Competition between Paramecium species
The fourth example comes from 
the classic work of the great Russianecologist G. F. Gause, who studiedcompetition in laboratory experimentsusing three species of the protozoan Paramecium (Gause, 1934, 1935).
All three species grew well alone, reaching stable carrying capa-
cities in tubes of liquid medium. There, Paramecium consumed 
bacteria or yeast cells, which themselves lived on regularlyreplenished oatmeal (Figure 8.3a).
When Gause grew P. aurelia and P. caudatum together, 
P. caudatum always declined to the point of extinction, leaving 
P. aurelia as the victor (Figure 8.3b). P. caudatum would not 
normally have starved to death as quickly as it did, but Gause’sexperimental procedure involved the daily removal of 10% of the
culture and animals. Thus, P. aurelia was successful in competi-
tion because near the point where its population size leveled off,it was still increasing by 10% per day (and able to counteract theenforced mortality), whilst P. caudatum was only increasing by 1.5%
per day (Williamson, 1972).
By contrast, when P. caudatum and P. bursaria were grown
together, neither species suffered a decline to the point of extinc-tion – they coexisted. But, their stable densities were muchlower than when grown alone (Figure 8.3c), indicating that theywere in competition with one another (i.e. they ‘suffered’). A closer
•• ••Balanus Chthamalus
MHWS
MHWN
MTL
MLWN
MLWS
Adults Larvae
DistributionDesiccation
Relative effects of
these factorsIntraspecific
competitionAdults Larvae
DistributionDesiccation
Relative effects of
these factorsInterspecific
competition
with BalanusFigure 8.2 The intertidal distribution of
adults and newly settled larvae of Balanus
balanoides and Chthamalus stellatus , with a
diagrammatic representation of the relative
effects of desiccation and competition.
Zones are indicated to the left: fromMHWS (mean high water, spring) down to MLWS (mean low water, spring); MTL, mean tide level; N, neap. (AfterConnell, 1961.)
. . . between
Parameciumspecies, . . .
. . . betweenbedstraws, . . .EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 229••230 CHAPTER 8
look, however, revealed that although they lived together in the
same tubes, they were, like Taniguchi and Nakano’s ﬁsh andConnell’s barnacles, spatially separated. P. caudatum tended to live
and feed on the bacteria suspended in the medium, whilst P. bur-
saria was concentrated on the yeast cells at the bottom of the tubes.
8.2.5 Coexistence amongst birds
Ornithologists are well aware thatclosely related species of birds often
coexist in the same habitat. For example, ﬁve Parus species 
occur together in English broad-leaved woodlands: the blue tit(P. caeruleus ), the great tit ( P. major ), the marsh tit ( P. palustris ),
the willow tit ( P. montanus ) and the coal tit ( P. ater ). All have short
beaks and hunt for food chieﬂy on leaves and twigs, but at times
on the ground; all eat insects throughout the year, and also seedsin winter; and all nest in holes, normally in trees. However, thecloser we look at the details of the ecology of such coexistingspecies, the more likely we will ﬁnd ecological differences – forexample, in precisely where within the trees they feed, in the sizeof their insect prey and the hardness of the seeds they take. Despitetheir similarities, we may be tempted to conclude that the tit 
species compete but coexist by eating slightly different resourcesin slightly different ways. However, a scientiﬁcally rigorous
approach to determine the current role of competition requiresthe removal of one or more of the competing species and monitoring the responses of those that remain. Martin andMartin (2001) did just this in a study of two very similar species:the orange-crowned warbler ( Vermivora celata ) and virginia’s
warbler ( V. virginiae ) whose breeding territories overlap in cent-
ral Arizona. On plots where one of the two species had been
removed, the remaining orange-crowned or virginia’s warblersﬂedged between 78 and 129% more young per nest, respectively.The improved performance was due to improved access to pre-ferred nest sites and consequent decreased losses of nestlings to predators. In the case of virginia’s warblers, but not orange-crowned warblers, feeding rate also increased in plots from
which the other species was removed (Figure 8.4).
8.2.6 Competition between diatoms
The ﬁnal example is from a laboratory
investigation of two species of fresh-water diatom: Asterionella formosa and
Synedra ulna (Tilman et al. , 1981). Both these algal species require
silicate in the construction of their cell walls. The investigation was
••Population density
(measured by volume)
24 16 80050150200
12
Days(a)
100
42 0P. aureliaPopulation density
(measured by volume)
24 16 80050150200
12
Days(b)
100
42 024 16 80050150200
12
Days100
42 0P. caudatum
20 16 80050150200
12
Days100
4P. bursaria
P. caudatum
P. bursariaP. caudatumP. aurelia
20 16 8002575
12
Days50
4(c)
Figure 8.3 Competition in Paramecium . (a) P. aurelia ,P. caudatum and P. bursaria all establish populations when grown alone in culture
medium. (b) When grown together, P. aurelia drives P. caudatum towards extinction. (c) When grown together, P. caudatum and P. bursaria
coexist, although at lower densities than when alone. (After Clapham, 1973; from Gause, 1934.)
. . . among birds . . .
. . . and between
diatomsEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 230••INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 231
unusual because at the same time as population densities were
being monitored, the impact of the species on their limitingresource (silicate) was being recorded. When either species wascultured alone in a liquid medium to which resources were continuously being added, it reached a stable carrying capacity
whilst maintaining the silicate at a constant low concentration(Figure 8.5a, b). However, in exploiting this resource, Synedra
reduced the silicate concentration to a lower level than did Aster-
ionella . Hence, when the two species were grown together, Synedra
maintained the concentration at a level that was too low for the
survival and reproduction of Asterionella . Synedra therefore com-
petitively excluded Asterionella from mixed cultures (Figure 8.5c).
••
% change when opposite
species removed
nstl–200
inc0
inc nstl–100100200
P = 0.02 P = 0.04P = 0.77 P = 0.83
Orange-crowned
warblerVirginia’s
warblerFigure 8.4 (right ) Percentage difference in feeding rates 
(mean ± SE) at orange-crowned warbler and virginia’s warbler
nests on plots where the other species had been experimentallyremoved. Feeding rates (visits per hour to the nest with food)were measured during incubation (inc) (rates of male feeding of
incubating females on the nest) and during the nestling period(nstl) (nestling feeding rates by both parents combined). Pvalues
are from t-tests of the hypothesis that each species fed at higher
rates on plots from which the other had been removed. Thishypothesis was supported for virginia’s warblers but not orange-crowned warblers. (After Martin & Martin, 2001.)
Asterionella
SynedraSilicate
Silicate (µmol l–1)
Time (days) Time (days)Population density (cells ml–1)
50 40 20101
0 30(c)  Interspecific competition
105
104
103
102
1030
020
10
50 40 20101
0 30105
104
103
102
1030
020
10
Silicate (µmol l–1)
50 40 20101
0 30(b)  Synedra  alone
105
104
103
102
1030
020
10
Population density (cells ml–1)
50 40 20101
0 30(a)  Asterionella  alone
105
104
103
102
1030
020
10
Figure 8.5 Competition between
diatoms. (a) Asterionella formosa , when
grown alone in a culture ﬂask, establishes a
stable population and maintains a resource,silicate, at a constant low level. (b) When
Synedra ulna is grown alone it does the
same, but maintains silicate at an evenlower level. (c) When grown together, intwo replicates, Synedra drives Asterionella
to extinction. (After Tilman et al. , 1981.)EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 231232 CHAPTER 8
8.3 Assessment: some general features of
interspeciﬁc competition
8.3.1 Unraveling ecological and evolutionary 
aspects of competition
These examples show that individuals of different species can 
compete. This is hardly surprising. The ﬁeld experiments with barnacles and warblers also show that different species do com-pete in nature (i.e. there was a measurable interspeciﬁc reductionin abundance and/or fecundity and/or survivorship). It seems,
moreover, that competing species may either exclude oneanother from particular habitats so that they do not coexist (aswith the bedstraws, the diatoms and the ﬁrst pair of Paramecium
species), or may coexist, perhaps by utilizing the habitat inslightly different ways (e.g. the barnacles and the second pair ofParamecium species).
But what about the story of the coexisting tits? Certainly the
ﬁve bird species coexist and utilize the habitat in slightly differ-ent ways. But does this have anything to do with competition?
It may do. It may be that the ﬁve species of tit coexist as a resultof evolutionary responses to interspeciﬁc competition. Thisrequires some further explanation. When two species compete,individuals of one or both species may suffer reductions in fecundity and/or survivorship, as we have seen. The ﬁttest indi-viduals of each species may then be those that (relatively speak-ing) escape competition because they utilize the habitat in waysthat differ most from those adopted by individuals of the otherspecies. Natural selection will then favor such individuals, and eventually the population may consist entirely of them. The twospecies will evolve to become more different from one anotherthan they were previously; they will compete less, and thus willbe more likely to coexist.
The trouble with this as an expla-
nation for the tit story is that there 
is no proof. We need to beware, inConnell’s (1980) phrase, of uncriticallyinvoking the ‘ghost of competitionpast’. We cannot go back in time to
check whether the species ever competed more than they do now.A plausible alternative interpretation is that the species have, inthe course of their evolution, responded to natural selection indifferent but entirely independent ways. They are distinct species,and they have distinctive features. But they do not competenow, nor have they ever competed; they simply happen to be dif-ferent. If all this were true, then the coexistence of the tits wouldhave nothing to do with competition. Alternatively again, it maybe that competition in the past eliminated a number of otherspecies, leaving behind only those that are different in their utilization of the habitat: we can still see the hand of the ghostof competition past, but acting as an ecological force (eliminat-ing species) rather than an evolutionary one (changing them).The tit story, therefore, and the difﬁculties with it, illustrate
two important general points. The ﬁrst is that we must pay 
careful, and separate, attention to both the ecological and the 
evolutionary effects of interspeciﬁc competition. The ecologicaleffects are, broadly, that species may be eliminated from a hab-itat by competition from individuals of other species; or, if com-peting species coexist, that individuals of at least one of them suffer reductions in survival and/or fecundity. The evolutionaryeffects appear to be that species differ more from one another than they would otherwise do, and hence compete less (but seeSection 8.9).
The second point, though, is that
there are profound difﬁculties in invok-
ing competition as an explanation forobserved patterns, and especially in invoking it as an evolution-ary explanation. An experimental manipulation (for instance, theremoval of one or more species) can, as we have seen with thewarblers, indicate the presence of current competition if it leadsto an increase in the fecundity or survival or abundance of the
remaining species. But negative results would be equally compatiblewith the past elimination of species by competition, the evolu-tionary avoidance of competition in the past, and the independ-ent evolution of noncompeting species. In fact, for many sets of data, there are no easy or agreed methods of distinguishingbetween these explanations (see Chapter 19). Thus, in theremainder of this chapter (and in Chapter 19) when examiningthe ecological and, especially, the evolutionary effects of com-petition, we will need to be more than usually cautious.
8.3.2 Exploitation and interference competition 
and allelopathy
For now, though, what other general
features emerge from our examples?As with intraspeciﬁc competition, abasic distinction can be made between interference and exploita-tion competition (although elements of both may be found in 
a single interaction) (see Section 5.1.1). With exploitation, individuals interact with each other indirectly, responding to aresource level that has been depressed by the activity of com-petitors. The diatom work provides a clear example of this. Bycontrast, Connell’s barnacles provide an equally clear example of interference competition. Balanus , in particular, directly and 
physically interfered with the occupation by Chthamalus of limited
space on the rocky substratum.
Interference, on the other hand, is
not always as direct as this. Amongst
plants, it has often been claimed that interference occurs throughthe production and release into the environment of chemicals that are toxic to other species but not to the producer (known as allelopathy). There is no doubt that chemicals with such 
•• ••. . . or simply
evolution?
interference andexploitation
allelopathycoexistingcompetitors or the‘ghost of competitionpast’? . . .EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 232INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 233
properties can be extracted from plants, but establishing a role
for them in nature or that they have evolved because of their 
allelopathic effects, has proved difﬁcult. For example, extracts frommore than 100 common agricultural weeds have been reportedto have allelopathic potential against crop species (Foy & Inderjit,
2001), but the studies generally involved unnatural laboratory bioassays rather than realistic ﬁeld experiments. In a similarmanner, Vandermeest et al. (2002) showed in the laboratory that
an extract from American chestnut leaves ( Castanea dentata ) 
suppressed germination of the shrub rosebay rhododendron(Rhododendron maximum ). The American chestnut was the most
common overstory tree in the USA’s eastern deciduous forest untilravaged by chestnut blight ( Cryphonectria parasitica ). Vandermeest
et al. concluded that the expansion of rhododendron thickets
throughout the 20th century may have been due as much to the
cessation of the chestnut’s allelopathic inﬂuence as to the morecommonly cited invasion of canopy openings following blight,heavy logging and ﬁre. However, their hypothesis cannot be tested.Amongst competing tadpole species, too, water-borne inhibitoryproducts have been implicated as a means of interference (mostnotably, perhaps, an alga produced in the feces of the commonfrog, Rana temporaria , inhibiting the natterjack toad, Bufo calamita
(Beebee, 1991; Grifﬁths et al., 1993)), but here again their importance
in nature is unclear (Petranka, 1989). Of course, the production byfungi and bacteria of allelopathic chemicals that inhibit the growthof potentially competing microorganisms is widely recognized –and exploited in the selection and production of antibiotics.
8.3.3 Symmetric and asymmetric competition
Interspeciﬁc competition (like intra-
speciﬁc competition) is frequently highlyasymmetric – the consequences areoften not the same for both species. For instance, with Connell’s barnacles,
Balanus excluded Chthamalus from their zone of potential over-
lap, but any effect of Chthamalus on Balanus was negligible:
Balanus was limited by its own sensitivity to desiccation. An anal-
ogous situation is provided by two species of cattail (reedmace)
in ponds in Michigan; Typha latifolia occurs mostly in shallower
water whilst T. angustifolia occurs in deeper water. When grown
together (in sympatry) in artiﬁcial ponds, the two species mirrortheir natural distributions, with T. latifolia mainly occupying
depth zones from 0 to 60 cm below the water surface and T. angus-
tifolia mainly from 60 to 90 cm (Grace & Wetzel, 1998). When
grown on its own (allopatry), the depth distribution of T. angus-
tifolia shifts markedly towards shallower depths. In contrast, 
T. latifolia shows only a minor shift towards greater depth in the
absence of interspeciﬁc competition.
On a broader front, it seems that highly asymmetric cases of
interspeciﬁc competition (where one species is little affected)generally outnumber symmetric cases (e.g. Keddy & Shipley, 1989).
The more fundamental point, however, is that there is a con-tinuum linking the perfectly symmetric competitive cases tostrongly asymmetric ones. Asymmetric competition results fromthe differential ability of species to occupy higher positions in a competitive hierarchy. In plants, for example, this may result
from height differences, with one species able to completelyover-top another and preempt access to light (Freckleton &Watkinson, 2001). In a similar vein, Dezfuli et al. (2002) have argued
that asymmetric competition might be expected between para-site species that occupy sequential positions in the gut of theirhost, with a stomach parasite reducing resources and adverselyinﬂuencing an intestinal parasite further downstream, but not vice versa. Asymmetric competition is especially likely where there is a very large difference in the size of competing species.Reciprocal exclusion experiments have shown that grazingungulates (domestic sheep and Spanish ibex Capra pyrenaica )
reduce the abundance of the herbivorous beetle Timarcha lugens
in Spanish scrubland by exploitation competition (and partly 
by incidental predation). However, there was no effect of beetleexclusion on ungulate performance (Gomez & Gonzalez-Megias, 2002).
8.3.4 Competition for one resource may inﬂuence
competition for another
Finally, it is worth noting that competition for one resource
often affects the ability of an organism to exploit anotherresource. For example, Buss (1979) showed that in interactionsbetween species of bryozoa (colonial, modular animals), thereappears to be an interdependence between competition for space
and for food. When a colony of one species contacts a colony of another species, it interferes with the self-generated feeding currents upon which bryozoans rely (competition for spaceaffects feeding). But a colony short of food will, in turn, have agreatly reduced ability to compete for space (by overgrowth).
Comparable examples are found
amongst rooted plants. If one speciesinvades the canopy of another anddeprives it of light, the suppressed
species will suffer directly from the reduction in light energy thatit obtains, but this will also reduce its rate of root growth, and it will therefore be less able to exploit the supply of water andnutrients in the soil. This in turn will reduce its rate of shoot and leaf growth. Thus, when plant species compete, repercussionsﬂow backwards and forwards between roots and shoots (Wilson,1988a). A number of workers have attempted to separate the effectsof canopy and root competition by an experimental design in whichtwo species are grown: (i) alone; (ii) together; (iii) in the samesoil, but with their canopies separated; and (iv) in separate soilwith their canopies intermingling. One example is a study of 
•• ••interspeciﬁc
competition isfrequently highlyasymmetric
root and shootcompetitionEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 233234 CHAPTER 8
maize ( Zea mays ) and pea plants ( Pisum sativum ) (Semere &
Froud-Williams, 2001). In full competition, with roots and
shoots intermingling, the biomass production of maize and peasrespectively (dry matter per plant, 46 days after sowing) was reducedto 59 and 53% of the ‘control’ biomass when the species were
grown alone. When only the roots intermingled, pea plantbiomass production was still reduced to 57% of the controlvalue, but when just the shoots intermingled, biomass produc-tion was only reduced to 90% of the control (Figure 8.6). Theseresults indicate, therefore, that soil resources (mineral nutrientsand water) were more limiting than light, a common ﬁnding inthe literature (Snaydon, 1996). They also support the idea of rootand shoot competition combining to generate an overall effect,in that the overall reduction in plant biomass (to 53%) was close
to the product of the root-only and shoot-only reductions (90%of 57% is 51.3%).
8.4 Competitive exclusion or coexistence?
The results of experiments such as those described here highlight
a critical question in the study of the ecological effects of inter-speciﬁc competition: what are the general conditions that permitthe coexistence of competitors, and what circumstances lead to competitive exclusion? Mathematical models have provided
important insights into this question.
8.4.1 A logistic model of interspeciﬁc competition
The ‘Lotka–Volterra’ model of interspeciﬁc competition (Volterra,
1926; Lotka, 1932) is an extension of the logistic equation describedin Section 5.9. As such, it incorporates all of the logistic’s short-
comings, but a useful model can none the less be constructed,shedding light on the factors that determine the outcome of a com-petitive interaction.
The logistic equation:
(8.1)
contains, within the brackets, a term responsible for the 
incorporation of intraspeciﬁc competition. The basis of theLotka–Volterra model is the replacement of this term by one whichincorporates both intra- and interspeciﬁc competition.
The population size of one species can be denoted by N
1, and
that of a second species by N2. Their carrying capacities and
intrinsic rates of increase are K1, K2, r1and r2, respectively.
Suppose that 10 individuals of 
species 2 have, between them, the
same competitive, inhibitory effect onspecies 1 as does a single individual of
species 1. The total competitive effect on species 1 (intra- and inter-speciﬁc) will then be equivalent to the effect of ( N
1+N2/10)
species 1 individuals. The constant (1/10 in the present case) is
called a competition coefﬁcient and is denoted by α12(‘alpha-one-
two’). It measures the per capita competitive effect on species 1of species 2. Thus, multiplying N
2by α12converts it to a number
of ‘N1-equivalents’. (Note that α12<1 means that individuals of
species 2 have less inhibitory effect on individuals of species 1 thanindividuals of species 1 have on others of their own species,whilst α
12>1 means that individuals of species 2 have a greater
inhibitory effect on individuals of species 1 than do the species 1individuals themselves.)  d
dN
trNKN
K  (  )=−
•• ••Grown alone Root competition Shoot competitionRoot and shoot
competition
53%90%
57%100%
Figure 8.6 Root and shoot competition
between maize and pea plants. Above are
the experimental plants used, below are thedry weights of pea plants after 46 days as apercentage of those achieved when grown
alone. (Data from Semere & Froud-Williams, 2001.)
a: the competition
coefﬁcientEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 234INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 235
The crucial element in the model is
the replacement of N1in the bracket of
the logistic equation with a term signi-
fying ‘ N1plus N1-equivalents’, i.e.:
(8.2)
or:
(8.3)
and in the case of the second species:
(8.4)
These two equations constitute the Lotka–Volterra model.
To appreciate the properties of 
this model, we must ask the question:
when (under what circumstances) doeseach species increase or decrease inabundance? In order to answer this, itis necessary to construct diagrams in
which all possible combinations of species 1 and species 2 abun-dance can be displayed (i.e. all possible combinations of N
1and
N2). These will be diagrams (Figures 8.7 and 8.9), with N1plotted
on the horizontal axis and N2plotted on the vertical axis, such
that there are low numbers of both species towards the bottom
left, high numbers of both species towards the top right, and soon. Certain combinations of N
1and N2will give rise to increases
in species 1 and/or species 2, whilst other combinations will giverise to decreases in species 1 and/or species 2. Crucially, thered
dN
trNKN N
K2
222 2 21 1
2  (    ). =−− αd
dN
trNKN N
K1
111 1 12 2
1  (    )=−− αd
dN
trNKN N
K1
111 1 12 2
1  (   (   ))=−+ αmust also therefore be ‘zero isoclines’ for each species (lines
along which there is neither an increase nor a decrease), divid-ing the combinations leading to increase from those leading todecrease. Moreover, if a zero isocline is drawn ﬁrst, there will becombinations leading to an increase on one side of it, and com-
binations leading to a decrease on the other.
In order to draw a zero isocline for species 1, we can use the
fact that on the zero isocline d N
1/dt=0 (by deﬁnition), that is (from
Equation 8.3):
r1N1(K1−N1−α21N2)=0. (8.5)
This is true when the intrinsic rate of increase ( r1) is zero, and
when the population size ( N1) is zero, but – much more import-
antly in the present context – it is also true when:
K1−N1−α21N2=0, (8.6)
which can be rearranged as:
N1=K1−α21N2. (8.7)
In other words, everywhere along the straight line which this 
equation represents, d N1/dt=0. The line is therefore the zero 
isocline for species 1; and since it is a straight line it can be 
drawn by ﬁnding two points on it and joining them. Thus, in 
Equation 8.7, when:
(point A, Figure 8.7a) (8.8)
and when:
N2=0, N1=K(point B, Figure 8.7a), (8.9)
and joining them gives the zero isocline for species 1. Below and
to the left of this, the numbers of both species are relatively low,
and species 1, subjected to only weak competition, increases inabundance (the arrows in the ﬁgure, representing this increase,point from left to right, since N
1is on the horizontal axis). Above
and to the right of the line, the numbers are high, competition
is strong and species 1 decreases in abundance (arrows fromright to left). Based on an equivalent derivation, Figure 8.7b hascombinations leading to an increase and decrease in species 2, sep-
arated by a species 2 zero isocline, with arrows, like the N
2axis,
running vertically.
Finally, in order to determine the outcome of competition in
this model, it is necessary to fuse Figures 8.7a and b, allowing the
behavior of a joint population to be predicted. In doing this, it
should be noted that the arrows in Figure 8.7 are actually vectors– with a strength as well as a direction – and that to determineNNK
121
120  ,   ==α
•• ••Lotka–Volterra model: 
a logistic model fortwo species
behavior of theLotka–Volterra modelis investigated using‘zero isoclines’
(a)
N2K1
α12A
B
K1N1(b)
N
2K2
K2/α21N1
Figure 8.7 The zero isoclines generated by the Lotka–Volterra
competition equations. (a) The N1zero isocline: species 1 increases
below and to the left of it, and decreases above and to the right 
of it. (b) The equivalent N2zero isocline.EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 235236 CHAPTER 8
the behavior of a joint N1, N2popula-
tion, the normal rules of vector addition
should be applied (Figure 8.8).
Figure 8.9 shows that there are, in
fact, four different ways in which thetwo zero isoclines can be arranged relative to one another, and
the outcome of competition will be different in each case. Thedifferent cases can be deﬁned and distinguished by the interceptsof the zero isoclines. For instance, in Figure 8.9a:
(8.10)
i.e.:
K
1>K2α12and K1α21>K2. (8.11)
The ﬁrst inequality ( K1>K2α12) indicates
that the inhibitory intraspeciﬁc effects
that species 1 can exert on itself aregreater than the interspeciﬁc effectsthat species 2 can exert on species 1. The
second inequality, however, indicatesthat species 1 can exert more of an effect on species 2 thanspecies 2 can on itself. Species 1 is thus a strong interspeciﬁc com-petitor, whilst species 2 is a weak interspeciﬁc competitor; and as the vectors in Figure 8.9a show, species 1 drives species 2 toextinction and attains its own carrying capacity. The situation isKKKK1
12212
21 αα    >> and
•• ••(d)
N2K1
α12
N1K2
K2/α21 K1(a)
N2K1
α12
K1
N1K2
K2/α21(b)
N2
K1
α12
N1K2
K2/α21 K1
(c)
N2K1
α12
K2/α21
N1K2
K1Figure 8.9 The outcomes of competition
generated by the Lotka–Volterra
competition equations for the four possible arrangements of the N
1and N2
zero isoclines. Vectors, generally, refer to joint populations, and are derived asindicated in (a). The solid circles showstable equilibrium points. The open circlein (c) is an unstable equilibrium point. For
further discussion, see the text.four ways in which
the two zero isoclinescan be arrangedstrong interspeciﬁccompetitorsoutcompete weak interspeciﬁccompetitorsN1N2Joint
population
Figure 8.8 Vector addition. When species 1 and 2 increase in 
the manner indicated by the N1and N2arrows (vectors), the joint
population increase is given by the vector along the diagonal of
the rectangle, generated as shown by the N1and N2vectors.EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 236INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 237
reversed in Figure 8.8b. Hence, Figures 8.8a and b describe cases
in which the environment is such that one species invariably out-competes the other.
In Figure 8.9c:
(8.12)
i.e.:
K
2α12>K1and K1α21>K2. (8.13)
Thus, individuals of both species com-pete more strongly with individuals 
of the other species than they doamongst themselves. This will occur, forexample, when each species producesa substance that is toxic to the otherspecies but is harmless to itself, or
when each species is aggressive towards or even preys upon indi-viduals of the other species, more than individuals of its own species.The consequence, as the ﬁgure shows, is an unstable equilibriumcombination of N
1and N2(where the isoclines cross), and two 
stable points. At the ﬁrst of these stable points, species 1 reaches
its carrying capacity with species 2 extinct; whilst at the second,species 2 reaches its carrying capacity with species 1 extinct.Which of these two outcomes is actually attained is determined
by the initial densities: the species which has the initial advantagewill drive the other species to extinction.
Finally, in Figure 8.9d:
(8.14)
i.e.:
K
1>K2α12and K2>K1α21. (8.15)
In this case, both species have less
competitive effect on the other species
than they have on themselves. Theoutcome, as Figure 8.9d shows, is astable equilibrium combination of thetwo species, which all joint populationstend to approach.
Overall, therefore, the Lotka–Volterra model of interspeciﬁc
competition is able to generate a range of possible outcomes: the predictable exclusion of one species by another, exclusion dependent on initial densities, and stable coexistence. Each of these possibilities will be discussed in turn, alongside the results
of laboratory and ﬁeld investigations. We will see that the threeoutcomes from the model correspond to biologically reasonableKKKK1
1222
211αα    >> andKKKK
21
1212
21    >>ααandcircumstances. The model, therefore, in spite of its simplicity and
its failure to address many of the complexities of the dynamicsof competiton in the real world, serves a useful purpose.
Before we move on, however, one
particular shortcoming of the Lotka–
Volterra model is worth noting. Theoutcome of competition in the model depends on the Ks and the
αs, but not on the rs, the intrinsic rates of increase. These deter-
mine the speed with which the outcome is achieved but not theoutcome itself. This, though, seems to be a result peculiar to com-petition between only two species, since in models of competi-tion between three or more species, the Ks, αs and rs combine
to determine the outcome (Strobeck, 1973).
8.4.2 The Competitive Exclusion Principle
Figure 8.9a and b describes cases in
which a strong interspeciﬁc competitorinvariably outcompetes a weak inter-speciﬁc competitor. It is useful to consider this situation from thepoint of view of niche theory (see Sections 2.2 and 3.8). Recall
that the niche of a species in the absence of competition from otherspecies is its fundamental niche (deﬁned by the combination of 
conditions and resources that allow the species to maintain a viablepopulation). In the presence of competitors, however, the speciesmay be restricted to a realized niche, the precise nature of which
is determined by which competing species are present. This dis-tinction stresses that interspeciﬁc competition reduces fecundityand survival, and that there may be parts of a species’ fundamentalniche in which, as a result of interspeciﬁc competition, the species
can no longer survive and reproduce successfully. These parts ofits fundamental niche are absent from its realized niche. Thus,returning to Figures 8.9a and b, we can say that the weak inter-speciﬁc competitor lacks a realized niche when in competition withthe stronger competitor. The real examples of interspeciﬁc com-petition previously discussed can now be re-examined in termsof niches.
In the case of the diatom species, the
fundamental niches of both species wereprovided by the laboratory regime(they both thrived when alone). Yetwhen Synedra and Asterionella com-
peted, Synedra had a realized niche
whilst Asterionella did not: there was competitive exclusion of
Asterionella . The same outcome was recorded when Gause’s 
P. aurelia and P. caudatum competed; P. caudatum lacked a realized
niche and was competitively excluded by P. aurelia . When P. cau-
datum and P. bursaria competed, on the other hand, both species
had realized niches, but these niches were noticeably different:
P. caudatum living and feeding on the bacteria in the medium, 
P. bursaria concentrating on the yeast cells on the bottom of the
•• ••when interspeciﬁc
competition is moreimportant thanintraspeciﬁc, theoutcome depends onthe species’ densities
when interspeciﬁccompetition is lessimportant thanintraspeciﬁc, thespecies coexistKs, as and rs
fundamental andrealized niches
coexistingcompetitors often exhibit adifferentiation oftheir realized nichesEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 237238 CHAPTER 8
tube. Coexistence was therefore associated with a differentiation
of realized niches, or a ‘partitioning’ of resources.
In the Galium experiments, the fundamental niches of both
species included both acidic and calcareous soils. In competitionwith one another, however, the realized niche of G. hercynicum was
restricted to acidic soils, whilst that of G. pumilum was restricted
to calcareous ones – there was reciprocal competitive exclusion.
Neither habitat allowed niche differentiation, and neither habitatfostered coexistence.
Amongst Taniguchi and Nakano’s salmonid ﬁshes, the funda-
mental niches of each species extended over a broad range in altitude (and temperature) but both were restricted to a smallerrealized niche (Dolly Varden at higher altitudes and white-spotted charr at lower altitudes).
Similarly, amongst Connell’s barnacles, the fundamental niche
of Chthamalus extended down into the Balanus zone, but com-
petition from Balanus restricted Chthamalus to a realized niche higher
up the shore. In other words, Balanus competitively excluded
Chthamalus from the lower zones, but for Balanus itself, even its
fundamental niche did not extend up into the Chthamalus zone:
its sensitivity to desiccation prevented it surviving even in the
absence of Chthamalus . Hence, overall, the coexistence of these
species was also associated with a differentiation of realizedniches.
The pattern that has emerged from
these examples has also been uncoveredin many others, and has been elevated
to the status of a principle: the Compet-
itive Exclusion Principle or ‘Gause’s Principle’. It can be stated as
follows: if two competing species coexist in a stable environment,then they do so as a result of niche differentiation, i.e. differen-tiation of their realized niches. If, however, there is no such differentiation, or if it is precluded by the habitat, then one com-peting species will eliminate or exclude the other. Thus exclusionoccurs when the realized niche of the superior competitor com-pletely ﬁlls those parts of the inferior competitor’s fundamentalniche that are provided by the habitat.
When there is coexistence of com-
petitors, a differentiation of realizedniches is sometimes seen to arise fromcurrent competition (an ‘ecological’effect), as with the barnacles. Often,however, the niche differentiation is
believed to have arisen either as a result of the past eliminationof those species without realized niches (leaving behind only those exhibiting niche differentiation – another ecological effect)or as an evolutionary effect of competition. In either case, present
competition may be negligible or at least impossible to detect.Consider again the coexisting tits. The species coexist and exhibitdifferentiation of their realized niches. But we do not knowwhether they compete now, or have ever competed in the past,or whether other species have been competitively excluded in thepast. It is impossible to say with certainty whether the Competit-
ive Exclusion Principle was relevant. If the species do actually compete currently, or if other species are being or have been com-petitively excluded, then the Principle is relevant in the strictestsense. If they competed only in the past, and that competition
has led to their niche differentiation, then the Principle is relev-ant, but only if it is extended from applying to the coexistence of‘competitors’ to the coexistence of ‘species that are or have ever
been competitors’. Of course, if the species have never competed,
then the Principle is of no relevance here. Clearly, interspeciﬁccompetition cannot be studied by the mere documentation of present interspeciﬁc differences.
With Martin and Martin’s warblers,
on the other hand, the two species
competed and coexisted, and the Competitive Exclusion Principle would suggest that this was a result of nichedifferentiation. But, whilst reasonable,this is by no means proven, since such differentiation was neither observed nor shown to be effective. Thus, when two competitors coexist, it is often difﬁcult to establish positively that there is niche differentiation. Worse still, it is impossible toprove the absence of it. When ecologists fail to ﬁnd differentia-tion, this might simply mean that they have looked in the wrongplace or in the wrong way. Clearly, there can be very realmethodological problems in establishing the pertinence of the Competitive Exclusion Principle in any particular case.
The Competitive Exclusion Principle has become widely
accepted because: (i) there is much good evidence in its favor;
(ii) it makes intuitive good sense; and (iii) there are theoreticalgrounds for believing in it (the Lotka–Volterra model). But therewill always be cases in which it has not been positively established;and as Section 8.5 will make plain, there are many other cases in which it simply does not apply. In short, interspeciﬁc com-petition is a process that is often associated, ecologically and evolutionarily, with a particular pattern (niche differentiation), butinterspeciﬁc competition and niche differentiation (the process andthe pattern) are not inextricably linked. Niche differentiation canarise through other processes, and interspeciﬁc competition neednot lead to a differentiation of niches.
8.4.3 Mutual antagonism
Figure 8.9c, derived from the Lotka–Volterra model, describes a
situation in which interspeciﬁc competition is, for both species,a more powerful force than intraspeciﬁc competition. This is knownas mutual antagonism.
An extreme example of such a 
situation is provided by work on two
species of ﬂour beetle: Tribolium con-
fusum and T. castaneum (Park, 1962). Park’s experiments in the 1940s,
•• ••the Competitive
Exclusion Principle
difﬁculty provingand, especially,disproving thePrincipleniche differentiationand interspeciﬁccompetition: apattern and a processnot always linked
reciprocal predationin ﬂour beetlesEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 238INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 239
1950s and 1960s were amongst the most inﬂuential in shaping ideas
about interspeciﬁc competition. He reared the beetles in simplecontainers of ﬂour, which provided fundamental and often real-ized niches for the eggs, larvae, pupae and adults of both species.There was certainly exploitation of common resources by the two
species; but in addition, the beetles preyed upon each other. Thelarvae and adults ate eggs and pupae, cannibalizing their own speciesas well as attacking the other species, and their propensity for doingso is summarized in Table 8.1. The important point is that takenoverall, beetles of both species ate more individuals of the otherspecies than they did of their own. Thus, a crucial mechanism inthe interaction of these competing species was reciprocal preda-tion (i.e. mutual antagonism), and it is easy to see that both specieswere more affected by inter- than intraspeciﬁc predation.
Figure 8.9c, the Lotka–Volterra
model, suggests that the consequences
of mutual antagonism are essentiallythe same whatever the exact mechan-ism. Because species are affected more
by inter- than intraspeciﬁc competition, the outcome is stronglydependent on the relative abundances of the competing species.The small amount of interspeciﬁc aggression displayed by a rarespecies will have relatively little effect on an abundant competi-tor; but the large amount of aggression displayed by an abundantspecies might easily drive a rare species to local extinction.Moreover, if abundances are ﬁnely balanced, a small change inrelative abundance will be sufﬁcient to shift the advantage from
one species to the other. The outcome of competition will thenbe unpredictable – either species could exclude the other,depending on the exact densities that they start with or attain.Table 8.2 shows that this was indeed the case with Park’s ﬂour
beetles. There was always only one winner, and the balance
between the species changed with climatic conditions. Yet at allintermediate climates the outcome was probable rather than deﬁnite .
Even the inherently inferior competitor occasionally achieved adensity at which it could outcompete the other species.
8.5 Heterogeneity, colonization and 
preemptive competition
At this point it is necessary to sound a loud note of caution. It has beenassumed in this chapter until now thatthe environment is sufﬁciently con-stant for the outcome of competition 
to be determined by the competitiveabilities of the competing species. Inreality, though, such situations are farfrom universal. Environments are usually a patchwork of favor-able and unfavorable habitats; patches are often only available temporarily; and patches often appear at unpredictable times andin unpredictable places. Even when interspeciﬁc competitionoccurs, it does not necessarily continue to completion. Systemsdo not necessarily reach equilibrium, and superior competitors
do not necessarily have time to exclude their inferiors. Thus, anunderstanding of interspeciﬁc competition itself is not alwaysenough. It is often also necessary to consider how interspeciﬁccompetition is inﬂuenced by, and interacts with, an inconstant orunpredictable environment. To put it another way: Ks and αs alone
may determine an equilibrium, but in nature, equilibria are veryoften not achieved. Thus, the speed with which an equilibriumis approached becomes important. That is, as we have alreadynoted in Section 8.4.1 in another context, not only Ks and αs, but
rs too play their part.
•• ••Table 8.1 Reciprocal predation (a form of mutual antagonism)
between two species of ﬂour beetle, Tribolium confusum and T.
castaneum . Both adults and larvae eat both eggs and pupae. In each
case, and overall, the preference of each species for its own or the
other species is indicated. Interspeciﬁc predation is more marked
than intraspeciﬁc predation. (After Park et al., 1965.)
‘Predator’ ‘Shows a preference for . . .’
Adults eating eggs T. confusum T. confusum
T. castaneum T. confusum
Adults eating pupae T. confusum T. castaneumT. castaneum T. confusum
Larvae eating eggs T. confusum T. castaneumT. castaneum T. castaneum
Larvae eating pupae T. confusum T. castaneumT. castaneum T. confusum
Overall T. confusum T. castaneumT. castaneum T. confusumTable 8.2 Competition between Tribolium confusum and 
T. castaneum in a range of climates. One species is always
eliminated and climate alters the outcome, but at intermediate
climates the outcome is nevertheless probable rather than deﬁnite.(After Park, 1954.)
Percentage wins
Climate T. confusum T. castaneum
Hot–moist 0 100
Temperate–moist 14 86Cold–moist 71 29Hot–dry 90 10Temperate–dry 87 13Cold–dry 100 0
the outcome is
probable rather than deﬁnitea note of caution:competition isinﬂuenced byheterogeneous,inconstant orunpredictableenvironmentsEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 239240 CHAPTER 8
8.5.1 Unpredictable gaps: the poorer competitor 
is a better colonizer
‘Gaps’ of unoccupied space occur unpredictably in many environ-
ments. Fires, landslips and lightning can create gaps in woodlands;storm-force seas can create gaps on the shore; and voracious preda-tors can create gaps almost anywhere. Invariably, these gaps arerecolonized. But the ﬁrst species to do so is not necessarily the
one that is best able to exclude other species in the long term.Thus, so long as gaps are created at the appropriate frequency,it is possible for a ‘fugitive’ species and a highly competitive speciesto coexist. The fugitive species tends to be the ﬁrst to colonizegaps; it establishes itself, and it reproduces. The other species tendsto be slower to invade the gaps, but having begun to do so, itoutcompetes and eventually excludes the fugitive from that particular gap.
This outline sketch has been given
some quantitative substance in a simu-
lation model in which the ‘fugitive’species is thought of as an annual plantand the superior competitor as a per-
ennial (Crawley & May, 1987). The model is one of a growingnumber that combine temporal and spatial dynamics by havinginteractions occur within individual cells of a two-dimensional lattice, but also having movement between cells (see also Inghe,1989; Dytham, 1994; Bolker et al. , 2003). In this model, each cell
can either be empty or occupied by either a single individual ofthe annual or a single ramet of the perennial. Each ‘generation’,the perennial can invade cells adjacent to those it already occu-pies, and it does so irrespective of whether those cells support an
annual (a reﬂection of the perennial’s competitive superiority), but individual ramets of the perennial may also die. The annual,however, can colonize any empty cell, which it does through thedeposition of randomly dispersed ‘seed’, the quantity of whichreﬂects the annual’s abundance. Putting details aside, the annualcan coexist with its superior competitor, providing the product(cE*) of the annual’s fecundity ( c) and the equilibrium proportion
of empty cells ( E*) is sufﬁciently great (Figure 8.10), i.e. as long
as the annual is a sufﬁciently good colonizer and there aresufﬁcient opportunities for it to do so. Indeed, the greater cE*,
the more the balance in the equilibrium mixture shifts towardsthe annual (Figure 8.10).
An example is provided by the
coexistence of the sea palm Postelsia
palmaeformis (a brown alga) and the
mussel Mytilus californianus on the coast
of Washington (Paine, 1979). Postelsia is
an annual that must re-establish itself
each year in order to persist at a site. It does so by attaching tothe bare rock, usually in gaps in the mussel bed created by waveaction. However, the mussels themselves slowly encroach on these gaps, gradually ﬁlling them and precluding colonization byPostelsia . Paine found that these species coexisted only at sites in
which there was a relatively high average rate of gap formation
(about 7% of surface area per year), and in which this rate wasapproximately the same each year. Where the average rate waslower, or where it varied considerably from year to year, therewas (either regularly or occasionally) a lack of bare rock for colonization. This led to the overall exclusion of Postelsia . At 
the sites of coexistence, on the other hand, although Postelsia was
eventually excluded from each gap, these were created with
sufﬁcient frequency and regularity for there to be coexistence inthe site as a whole.
8.5.2 Unpredictable gaps: the preemption of space
When two species compete on equal
terms, the result is usually predictable.But in the colonization of unoccupiedspace, competition is rarely even handed. Individuals of onespecies are likely to arrive, or germinate from the seed bank, 
in advance of individuals of another species. This, in itself, maybe enough to tip the competitive balance in favor of the ﬁrst species.If space is preempted by different species in different gaps, thenthis may allow coexistence, even though one species would alwaysexclude the other if they competed ‘on equal terms’.
For instance, Figure 8.11 shows the results of a competition
experiment between the annual grasses Bromus madritensis and B.
rigidus , which occur together in Californian rangelands (Harper,
1961). When they were sown simultaneously in an equiproportional
mixture, B. rigidus contributed overwhelmingly to the biomass of
the mixed population. But, by delaying the introduction of B. rigidus
•• ••fugitive annuals 
and competitiveperennials
 Proportion of patches occupied
by annual at equilibrium
4.0 2.4 0.80.60.81.0
1.6
cE*0.4
0.2
3.2
Figure 8.10 In a spatial lattice, a model fugitive annual plant 
can coexist with a competitively superior perennial provided 
cE*>1 (where cis the annual’s fecundity and E*the equilibrium
proportion of empty cells in the lattice). For larger values, thefraction of cells occupied by the annual increases with cE*. 
(After Crawley & May, 1987.)
coexistence of a
competitive musseland a fugitive seapalmﬁrst come, ﬁrstservedEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 240INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 241
into the mixtures, the balance was tipped decisively in favour of
B. madritensis . It is therefore quite wrong to think of the outcome
of competition as being always determined by the inherent com-petitive abilities of the competing species. Even an ‘inferior’competitor can exclude its superior if it has enough of a head start.
This can foster coexistence when repeated colonization occurs ina changing or unpredictable environment.
8.5.3 Fluctuating environments
The balance between competing species
can be shifted repeatedly, in fact, andcoexistence therefore fostered, simply as
a result of environmental change. This was the argument usedby Hutchinson (1961) to explain the ‘paradox of the plankton’ 
– the paradox being that numerous species of planktonic algaefrequently coexist in simple environments with little apparent scopefor niche differentiation. Hutchinson suggested that the envir-onment, although simple, was continually changing, particularlyon a seasonal basis. Thus, although the environment at any onetime would tend to promote the exclusion of certain species, it would alter and perhaps even favor these same species beforeexclusion occurred. In other words, the equilibrium outcome ofa competitive interaction may not be of paramount importanceif the environment typically changes long before the equilibrium
can be reached.
8.5.4 Ephemeral patches with unpredictable lifespans
Many environments, by their very
nature, are not simply variable butephemeral. Amongst the more obvi-ous examples are decaying corpses(carrion), dung, rotting fruit and fungi,
and temporary ponds. But note too that a leaf or an annual plantcan be seen as an ephemeral patch, especially if it is palatable toits consumer for only a limited period. Often, these ephemeralpatches have an unpredictable lifespan – a piece of fruit and itsattendant insects, for instance, may be eaten at any time by a bird. In these cases, it is easy to imagine the coexistence of two species: a superior competitor and an inferior competitor thatreproduces early.
One example concerns two species of pulmonate snail living
in ponds in northeastern Indiana. Artiﬁcially altering the density
of one or other species in the ﬁeld showed that the fecundity ofPhysa gyrina was signiﬁcantly reduced by interspeciﬁc competi-
tion from Lymnaea elodes , but the effect was not reciprocated. 
L. elodes was clearly the superior competitor when competition
continued throughout the summer. Yet P. gyrina reproduced 
earlier and at a smaller size than L. elodes , and in the many ponds
that dried up by early July it was often the only species to haveproduced resistant eggs in time. The species therefore coexistedin the area as a whole, in spite of P. gyrina ’s apparent inferiority
(Brown, 1982). Among frogs and toads, on the other hand, thecompetitively superior tadpoles of Scaphiopus holbrooki are even
more successful when ponds dry up because they have shorter
larval periods than weaker competitorssuch as Hyla chrysoscelis (Wilbur, 1987).
8.5.5 Aggregated distributions
A more subtle, but more generally
applicable path to the coexistence of asuperior and an inferior competitor ona patchy and ephemeral resource isbased on the idea that the two species
may have independent, aggregated (i.e.clumped) distributions over the available patches. This would meanthat the powers of the superior competitor were mostly directedagainst members of its own species (in the high-density clumps),but that this aggregated superior competitor would be absent from many patches – within which the inferior competitor couldescape competition. An inferior competitor may then be able tocoexist with a superior competitor that would rapidly exclude it
•• ••Figure 8.11 The effect of timing on competition. Bromus rigidus
makes an overwhelming contribution to the total dry weight 
per pot after 126 days growth when sown at the same time as B. madritensis . But, as the introduction of B. rigidus is delayed, its
contribution declines. Total yield per pot was unaffected by
delaying the introduction of B. rigidus . (After Harper, 1961.)Percentage contribution of B. madritensis
to total dry weight
0 1020
Delay before introduction
of B. rigidus  (days)406080100
20 30
paradox of the
planktoncoexistence of the strong with the fast . . .
. . . but not always
a clumped superiorcompetitor adverselyaffects itself andleaves gaps for itsinferiorEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 241••242 CHAPTER 8
from a continuous, homogeneous environment. Certainly it can
do so in models (see, for example, Atkinson & Shorrocks, 1981;Kreitman et al. , 1992; Dieckmann et al. , 2000). For instance, a 
simulation model (Figure 8.12) shows that the persistence ofsuch coexistence between competitors increases with the degree
of aggregation (as measured by the parameter kof the ‘negative
binomial’ distribution) until, at high levels of aggregation, coex-istence is apparently permanent, although this has nothing to dowith any niche differentiation. Since many species have aggregateddistributions in nature, these results may be applicable widely.
Note, however, that whilst such coexistence of competitors
has nothing to do with niche differentiation, it is linked to it bya common theme – that of species competing more frequentlyand intensively intraspeciﬁcally than they do interspeciﬁcally.
Niche differentiation is one means by which this can occur, buttemporary aggregations can give rise to the same phenomenon– even for the inferior competitor.
In seeking to justify the applicability of these models to the
real world, however, one question in particular needs to beanswered: are two similar species really likely to have independ-ent distributions over available patches of resource? The questionhas been addressed through an examination of a large numberof data sets from Diptera, especially drosophilid ﬂies – where eggsare laid, and larvae develop, in ephemeral patches (fruits, fungi,ﬂowers, etc.). In fact, there was little evidence for independencein the aggregations of coexisting species (Shorrocks et al. , 1990;
see also Worthen & McGuire, 1988). However, computer simu-lations suggest that whilst a positive association between species(i.e. a tendency to aggregate in the same patches) does make coexistence more difﬁcult, the level of association and aggregation
actually found would still generally lead to coexistence, whereasthere would be exclusion in a homogeneous environment(Shorrocks & Rosewell, 1987).
The importance of aggregation for
coexistence has been further supportedby another spatially explicit modelbased on a two-dimensional lattice of cells (see Section 8.5.1), eachof which could be occupied by one of ﬁve species of grass:Agrostis stolonifera , Cynosurus cristatus , Holcus lanatus , Lolium
perenne and Poa trivialis (Silvertown et al. , 1992). The model was
a ‘cellular automaton’, in which each cell can exist in a limited
number of discrete states (in this case, which species was in occu-pancy), with the state of each cell determined at each time step by a set of rules. In this case, the rules were based on thecell’s current state, the state of the neighboring cells and the probability that a species in a neighboring cell would replace itscurrent occupant. These replacement rates of each species by each other species were themselves based on ﬁeld observations(Thórhallsdóttir, 1990).
If the initial arrangement of the species over the grid was 
random (no aggregation), the three competitively inferior
species were quickly driven to extinction, and of the survivors,Agrostis (greater than 80% cell occupancy) rapidly dominated
Holcus . If, however, the initial arrangement was ﬁve equally
broad single-species bands across the landscape, the outcomechanged dramatically: (i) competitive exclusion was markedlydelayed even for the worst competitors ( Cynosurus and Lolium );
(ii) Holcus sometimes occupied more than 60% of the cells, at a
time (600 time steps) where, with an initially random arrange-
ment, it would have been close to extinction; and (iii) the out-come itself depended largely on which species started next to eachother, and hence, initially competed with each other.
There is no suggestion, of course, that natural communities
of grasses exist as broad single-species bands – but, neither arewe likely to ﬁnd communities with species mixed at random, suchthat there is no spatial organization to be taken into account. The
model emphasizes the dangers of ignoring aggregations (becausethey shift the balance towards intra- rather than interspeciﬁc com-petition, and hence promote coexistence), but also the dangers ofignoring the juxtaposition of aggregations, since these too mayserve to keep competitive subordinates away from their superiors.
Despite a rich body of theory and
models, there are few experimentalstudies that directly address the impactof spatial patterns on populationdynamics. Stoll and Prati (2001) performed experiments with realplants in a study that had much in common with Silvertown’s
••Generations of coexistence
10 6 20050100150
4
k of the negative binomial8
Figure 8.12 When two species compete on a continuously
distributed resource, one species would exclude the other in
approximately 10 generations (as indicated by the arrow).However, with these same species on a patchy and ephemeralresource, the number of generations of coexistence increases with
the degree of aggregation of the competitors, as measured by theparameter kof the ‘negative binomial’ distribution. Values above 
5 are effectively random distributions; values below 5 representincreasingly aggregated distributions. (After Atkinson & Shorrocks, 1981.)grasses in a cellular
automaton
plants in a ﬁeldexperimentEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 242••INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 243
theoretical treatment. They tested the hypothesis that intra-
speciﬁc aggregation can promote coexistence and thus maintainhigh species richness in experimental communities of four annualterrestrial plants: Capsella bursa-pastoris , Cardamine hirsuta , Poa
annua and Stellaria media . Stellaria is known to be the superior 
competitor among these species. Replicate three- and four-species
mixtures were sown at high density, and the seeds were eitherplaced completely at random or seeds of each species wereaggregated in subplots within the experimental areas. Intraspeciﬁcaggregation decreased the performance of the superior Stellaria
in the mixtures, whereas in all but one case aggregation improvedthe performance of the three inferior competitors (Figure 8.13).
More generally, the success of ‘neighborhood’ approaches
(Pacala, 1997) in the study of plant competition, where the focus
is on the competition experienced by individuals in local patches,rather than densities averaged out over whole populations,argues again in favor of the importance of acknowledging spatialheterogeneity. Coomes et al. (2002), for example, investigated com-
petition between two species of sand-dune plant, Aira praecox and
Erodium cicutarium , in northwest England. The smaller plant,
Aira, tended to be aggregated even at the smallest spatial scales,
whereas Erodium was moderately aggregated in patches of 30 and
50 mm radius but, if anything, was evenly spaced within 10 mmradius patches (Figure 8.14a). The two species, though, were negatively associated with one another at the smallest spatial scale (Figure 8.14b), indicating that Aira tended to occur in small,
single-species clumps. Aira was therefore much less liable to
competition from Erodium than would be the case if they were
distributed at random, justifying the application by Coomes et al.
of simulation models of competition where local responses were
explicitly incorporated.
Repeatedly in this section, then, the
heterogeneous nature of the environ-ment can be seen to have fosteredcoexistence without there being a marked differentiation ofniches. A realistic view of interspeciﬁc competition, therefore, mustacknowledge that it often proceeds not in isolation, but under the inﬂuence of, and within the constraints of, a patchy, imper-manent or unpredictable world. Furthermore, the heterogeneityneed not be in the temporal or spatial dimensions that we havediscussed so far. Individual variation in competitive ability
••0900
600
300(a) Capsella bursa-pastorisAbove ground biomass (g m–2)Random
Aggregated
0100
50(b) Cardamine hirsuta
0300
200
100(c) Poa annua
02000
1000
SmMixturesCbp Cbp Cbp Ch Cbp
Ch Ch Pa Pa Ch
Pa Sm Sm Sm Pa(d) Stellaria media
Figure 8.13 (left) The effect of intraspeciﬁc aggregation on 
above-ground biomass (mean ±SE) of four plant species grown 
for 6 weeks in three- and four-species mixtures (four replicates 
of each). The normally competitively superior Stellaria media (Sm)
did consistently less well when seeds were aggregated than when
they were placed at random. In contrast, the three competitivelyinferior species – Capsella bursa-pastoris (Cbp), Cardamine hirsuta
(Ch) and Poa annua (Pa) – almost always performed better when
the seeds had been aggregated. Note the different scales on thevertical axes. (From Stoll & Prati, 2001.)heterogeneity often
stabilizesEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 243244 CHAPTER 8
within species can also foster stable coexistence in cases where a
superior nonvariable competitor would otherwise exclude aninferior nonvariable species (Begon & Wall, 1987). This reinforcesa point that recurs throughout this text: heterogeneity (spatial,temporal or individual) can have a stabilizing inﬂuence on eco-
logical interactions.
8.6 Apparent competition: enemy-free space
Another reason for being cautious in our discussion of com-
petition is the existence of what Holt (1977, 1984) has called ‘apparent competition’, and what others have called ‘competition
for enemy-free space’ ( Jeffries & Lawton, 1984, 1985).
Imagine a single species of predator
or parasite that attacks two species ofprey (or host). Both prey species areharmed by the enemy, and the enemybeneﬁts from both species of prey.
Hence, the increase in abundance thatthe enemy achieves by consuming prey1 increases the harm it does to prey 2.Indirectly, therefore, prey 1 adverselyaffects prey 2 and vice versa. These
•• ••(b)Association index
100.00.41.0
0.2
30 50 10 30 50 10 30 501995 1996 1997
Radius (mm)0.60.81.21.41.6(a)Aggregation index
100.01.02.0
0.51.52.5
30 5010 30 50 10 30 501995 1996 1997Aira
Radius (mm)10 30 50 10 30 50 10 30 501995 1996 1997Erodium
Figure 8.14 (a) Spatial distribution of two
sand-dune species, Aira praecox and Erodium
cicutarium at a site in northwest England.
An aggregation index of 1 indicates a
random distribution. Indices greater than 
1 indicate aggregation (clumping) withinpatches with the radius as speciﬁed; valuesless than 1 indicate a regular distribution.Bars represent 95% conﬁdence intervals. (b) The association between Aira and
Erodium in each of the 3 years. An
association index greater than 1 indicatesthat the two species tended to be foundtogether more than would be expected by
chance alone in patches with the radius as speciﬁed; values less than 1 indicate atendency to ﬁnd one species or the other.Bars represent 95% conﬁdence intervals.(After Coomes et al. , 2002.)
two prey species
attacked by apredator are, in essence,indistinguishablefrom two consumerspecies competing for a resourceEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 244INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 245
interactions are summarized in Figure 8.15, which shows that 
from the point of view of the two prey species, the signs of theinteractions are indistinguishable from those that would apply in the indirect interaction of two species competing for a singleresource (exploitation competition). In the present case there
appears to be no limiting resource. Hence, the term ‘apparent com-petition’.
In an experiment involving a 
parasitoid (the ichneumonid wasp Venturia canescens ) and two caterpillar
hosts ( Plodia interpunctella and Ephestia
kuehniella ), Bonsall and Hassell (1997)
allowed free passage of the parasitoidbetween the host species but kept the
hosts apart to avoid the possibility of resource competition
between them. When the experimental chambers contained just a single host species together with the parasitoid, both theparasite and host persisted and exhibited damped oscillations in population size, tending towards a stable equilibrium (Fig-ure 8.16). But when the system was run with both host species,the parasitoid had a greater impact on the species with the lowerintrinsic rate of increase ( E. kuehniella ). This host showed increas-
ing population oscillations and invariably went extinct. By meansof their elegant experimental design, Bonsall and Hassell were ableto demonstrate the effect of apparent competition in a situationwhere resource competition between the caterpillar species wasruled out.
While the term ‘apparent competition’ is entirely appropriate,
it is sometimes useful to think of ‘enemy-free space’ as the lim-
iting resource for which prey (or host) species compete. This isbecause the persistence of prey species 1 will be favored byavoiding attacks from the predator, which we know also attacksprey 2. Clearly, prey 1 can achieve this by occupying a habitat,or adopting a form or a behavioral pattern, that is sufﬁciently different from that of prey 2. In short, ‘being different’ (i.e. nichedifferentiation) will once again favor coexistence – but it will do
so because it diminishes apparent competition or competition forenemy-free space.
A rare experimental demonstration
of apparent competition for enemy-
free space involves two groups of preyliving on subtidal rocky reefs at SantaCatalina Island, California. The ﬁrst comprises three species ofmobile gastropods, Tegula aureotincta , T. eiseni and Astraea undosa ;
the second comprises sessile bivalves, dominated by the clam Chama
arcana . Both groups were preyed upon by a lobster ( Panulirus 
interruptus ), an octopus ( Octopus bimaculatus ) and a whelk ( Kelletia
kelletii ), although these predators showed a marked preference for
the bivalves. In areas characterized by large boulders and much
crevice space (‘high relief’) there were high densities of bivalvesand predators, but only moderate densities of gastropods; whereasin low relief areas largely lacking crevice space (‘cobble ﬁelds’)there were apparently no bivalves, only a few predators but highdensities of gastropods.
The densities of the two prey groups were inversely correlated,
but there was little in their feeding biology to suggest that theywere competing for a shared food resource. On the other hand,when bivalves were experimentally introduced into cobble-ﬁeldareas, the number of predators congregating there increased, themortality rates of the gastropods increased (often observablyassociated with lobster or octopus predation) and the densities ofthe gastropods declined (Figures 8.17a, b). Experimental manip-
ulation of the (mobile) gastropods proved impossible, but cobblesites with high densities of gastropods supported higher densitiesof predators, and had higher mortality rates of experimentally addedbivalves than did sites with relatively low densities of gastropods(Figure 8.17c). On the rare high relief sites without Chama
bivalves, predator densities were lower, and gastropod densitieshigher, than was normally the case (Figure 8.17d). It seems clearthat each prey group adversely affected the other through an
•• ••Natural enemies (E)
(herbivores,
parasites,pathogens)(a) Interference:
a directinteraction(b) Exploitation:indirectinteraction,via a sharedresource(c) Indirectinteraction,via a sharedenemy(d) Indirect interactionvia other species onsame trophic level
Apparent competition Competition
Trophic level
Consumers (C)
Limiting resources (R)
(light, water, minerals,
vitamins, etc.)C1 C2C1 C2
RC1 C2E
C1 C2 C3Figure 8.15 In terms of the signs of 
their interactions, all of the following are
indistinguishable from one another: (a) twospecies interfering directly (interferencecompetition); (b) two species consuming 
a common resource (exploitationcompetition); (c) two species beingattacked by a common predator (‘apparentcompetition’ for ‘enemy-free space’); and(d) two species linked by a third which is a competitor of one and a mutualist of the other. ( ), direct interactions;( ), indirect interactions; arrowsindicate positive inﬂuences, circles indicate 
negative inﬂuences. (After Holt, 1984;Connell, 1990.)
evidence for apparent 
competition . . .. . . in two caterpillarssharing a parasitoid,.... . . in gastropods,bivalves and theirpredators . . .EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 245246 CHAPTER 8
increased number of predators, and hence increased predator-
induced mortality.
An experiment with a similar aim
involved removing a common leaf-mining ﬂy ( Calycomyza sp.) and its host
plant Lepidaploa tortuosa (Asteracea) 
in replicate sites in a tropical forest
community in Belize, Central America.
Other leaf-mining ﬂy species that shared natural enemies (parasitoid wasps) with Calycomyza , but whose host plants were
different, demonstrated reduced parasitism and increased abund-ance (a year later) in the removal sites than in the control sites(Morris et al. , 2004). These results support predictions of appar-
ent competition, involving a shared natural enemy, in a situation
where interspeciﬁc competition among the ﬂy species for host plantscould not occur.
To complete the picture, there is another indirect interaction
between two species that qualiﬁes for the term ‘apparent com-petition’ (Figure 8.15d), where species 1 and 2 have negative impactson one another, and species 2 and 3 have positive (mutualistic)impacts (see Chapter 13). Species 1 and 3 then have indirect 
negative impacts on one another without sharing a commonresource or, for that matter, a common predator. They exhibitapparent competition, although not for enemy-free space (Connell,1990).
The examples mentioned so far
concern apparent competition in ani-
mals. Connell (1990) carried out a par-ticularly revealing reappraisal of 54 published plant examples of ﬁeld experiments on ‘competition’, where the original authorshad claimed to have demonstrated conventional interspeciﬁccompetition in 50. A closer look revealed that, in many of these,insufﬁcient information had been collected to distinguish betweenconventional competition and apparent competition; and in a 
number of others the information was available – but wasambiguous. For example, one study showed that removal ofArtemisia bushes from a large site in Arizona led to much better
growth of 22 species of herb than was observed in either undis-turbed sites or sites where Artemisia was removed from narrow
3 m strips. This was originally interpreted in terms of greatly
•• ••Host 2 Host 1(a)
Host 2 Host 1(b)60 0 40–4–2
20Host 1
0Log density Log density
60 00
40
Time (days)–4–2
20Host 1 + 2Log density
60 0 40–4–2
20Host 2
Figure 8.16 Parasite-mediated apparent
competition via a parasitoid wasp Venturia
canescens that lays eggs in two caterpillar
host species. The experimental setups are
illustrated on the left and the population
dynamics of the parasitoid (dashed blacklines) and host species (host 1 Plodia
interpunctella (orange lines); host 2 Ephestia
kuehniella (black lines)) on the right. (a)
When only a single host was present, theparasitoid and host coexisted with stabledynamics. (b) When the parasitoid hadaccess to both hosts, host 2 showeddiverging oscillations and went extinct.
(From Hudson & Greenman, 1998, after Bonsall & Hassell, 1997.)
. . . and in leaf-
mining ﬂies sharingparasitoids in atropical forest
reappraisal of plantcompetitionEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 246INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 247
reduced exploitative competition for water in the former case
(Robertson, 1947). However, the herbs in the larger site also experienced greatly reduced grazing pressure from deer, rodentsand insects, for which the Artemisia bushes were not only a
source of food but a place of shelter, too. The outcome is there-
fore equally likely to have resulted
from reduced apparent competition.
This emphasizes that the relative
neglect of apparent competition in the past has been unwarranted, but also re-emphasizes that the
distinction is important within interspeciﬁc competition betweenpattern on the one hand, and process or mechanism on theother. In the past, patterns of niche differentiation, and also ofincreased abundance of one species in the absence of another, 
have been interpreted as evidence of competition too readily. Nowwe can see that such patterns can arise through a wide variety of processes, and that a proper understanding requires that we distinguish between them – not only discriminating between
•• ••
Number per 10 m2
0.51(a)
Panulirus
interruptusKelletia
kellettiiOctopus
bimaculatus
Predators150300
Tegula
eiseniAstraea
undosaTegula
aureotincta
Gastropods
Snail density (no. m–2)
65 220040120160
44
Elapsed time (days)(b)
80Number per 10 m2
0.30.6(c)
Chama present Chama absent
Predators
Number per 10 m21.0(d)
Predators Gastropods
Gsstropods per m2 40
20
Figure 8.17 Evidence for apparent competition for predator-free space at Santa Catalina Island, USA. (a) Predator density (number per 
10 m2, with standard errors) and gastropod mortality increased (number of ‘newly dead’ shells per site, with standard errors) when b ivalves
were added to gastropod-dominated cobble sites (colored bars) relative to controls (gray bars). (b) This led to a decline in ga stropod
density (standard error bars shown). (c) Predator density was higher (number per 10 m2, with standard errors) at high (colored bars) 
than at low (gray bars) gastropod-density cobble sites, both in the presence and absence of Chama . (d) Densities of predators were lower
(number per 10 m2, with standard errors) and densities of gastropods higher (number per m2, with standard errors) at high-relief sites
without Chama (colored bars) than at those with (gray bars). (After Schmitt, 1987.)
distinguishing pattern
and processEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 247248 CHAPTER 8
conventional and apparent competition, but also specifying
mechanisms within, say, conventional competition (a point to whichwe return in Section 8.10).
8.7 Ecological effects of interspeciﬁc
competition: experimental approaches
Notwithstanding the important inter-actions between competition and environmental heterogeneity, and the
complications of apparent competition, a great deal of attentionhas been focused on conventional competition itself. We have
already noted the difﬁculties in interpreting merely observa-tional evidence (but see Freckleton & Watkinson, 2001), and it is for this reason that many studies of the ecological effects of interspeciﬁc competition have taken an experimental approach.For example, we have seen manipulative ﬁeld experimentsinvolving barnacles (see Section 8.2.2), birds (see Section 8.2.5),cattails (see Section 8.3.3) and snails (see Section 8.5.4), where thedensity of one or both species was altered (usually reduced). The fecundity, the survivorship, the abundance or the resource
utilization of the remaining species was subsequently monitored.It was then compared either with the situation prior to themanipulation, or, far better, with a comparable control plot inwhich no manipulation had occurred. Such experiments have consistently provided valuable information, but they are typicallyeasier to perform on some types of organism (e.g. sessile organ-isms) than they are on others.
The second type of experimental evidence has come from work
carried out under artiﬁcial, controlled (often laboratory) con-ditions. Again, the crucial element has usually been a comparisonbetween the responses of species living alone and their responseswhen in combination. Such experiments have the advantage ofbeing comparatively easy to perform and control, but they have
two major disadvantages. The ﬁrst is that species are examinedin environments that are different from those they experience naturally. The second is the simplicity of the environment: it may preclude niche differentiation because niche dimensions aremissing that would otherwise be important. Nevertheless, theseexperiments can provide useful clues to the likely effects of competition in nature.
8.7.1 Longer term experiments
The most direct way of discovering the outcome of competition
between two species in the laboratory, or under other controlledconditions, is to put them together and leave them to it. How-ever, since even the most one-sided competition is likely to takea few generations (or a reasonable period of modular growth) beforeit is completed, this direct approach is easier, and has been more
frequently used, in some species than in others. It has most fre-quently been applied to insects (such as the ﬂour beetle examplein Section 8.4.3) and microorganisms (such as the Paramecium
example in Section 8.2.4). Note that neither higher plants, nor vertebrates, nor large invertebrates, lend themselves readily to thisapproach (although a plant example is discussed in Section 8.10.1).We must be aware that this may bias our view of the nature ofinterspeciﬁc competition.
8.7.2 Single-generation experiments
Given these problems, the alternative ‘laboratory’ approach,
especially with plants (although the methods have occasionallybeen used with animals), has generally been to follow populationsover just a single generation, comparing ‘inputs’ and ‘outputs’. A number of experimental designs have been used.
In ‘substitutive’ experiments, the
effect of varying the proportion of
each of two species is explored whilstkeeping overall density constant (deWit, 1960). Thus, at an overall density of say 200 plants, a seriesof mixtures would be set up: 100 of species A with 100 of speciesB, 150 A and 50 B, 0 A and 200 B, and so on. At the end of theexperimental period, the amount of seed or the biomass of eachspecies in each mixture would be monitored. Such replacement
series may then be established at a range of total densities. In practice, however, most workers have used only a single total density, and this has led to considerable criticism of the designsince it means that the effect of competition over several gener-ations – when total density would inevitably alter – cannot be predicted (see Firbank & Watkinson, 1990).
None the less, replacement series have provided valuable
insights into the nature of interspeciﬁc competition and the factors inﬂuencing its intensity (Firbank & Watkinson, 1990). An early, inﬂuential study was that of de Wit et al. (1966) on com-
petition between the grass Panicum maximum and the legume Glycine
javanica , which often form mixtures in Australian pastures.
Panicum acquires its nitrogen only from the soil, but Glycine
acquires part of its nitrogen from the air, by nitrogen ﬁxation,
through its root association with the bacterium Rhizobium (see
Section 13.10.1). The competitors were grown in replacement serieswith and without an inoculation of Rhizobium , and the results are
given both as replacement diagrams and as ‘relative yield totals’(Figure 8.18). The relative yield of a species in a mixture is theratio of its yield in the mixture to its yield alone in the replace-ment series, removing any absolute yield differences betweenspecies and referring both to the same scale. The relative yieldtotal of a particular mixture is then the sum of the two relativeyields. It is fairly clear from the replacement series (Figure 8.18a)
•• ••ﬁeld and laboratory
experiments
substitutiveexperimentsEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 248INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 249
that both species, but especially Glycine , fared better (were less
affected by interspeciﬁc competition) in the presence than in the
absence of Rhizobium . This is clearer still, however, from the rel-
ative yield totals (Figure 8.18b), which never departed signiﬁcantlyfrom 1 in the absence of Rhizobium , but consistently exceeded 1
in its presence. This suggested that niche differentiation was notpossible without Rhizobium (a second species could only be
accommodated by a compensatory reduction in the output of theﬁrst) and that niche differentiation occurred in its presence (the
species yielded more between them than either could alone).
A second popular approach in the
past has been the use of an ‘additive’
design, in which one species (typicallya crop) is sown at a constant density, along with a range of densities of a second species (typically a weed). The justiﬁcationfor this is that it mimics the natural situation of a crop infestedby a weed, and it therefore provides information on the likely effect on the crop of various levels of infestation (Firbank &
Watkinson, 1990). A problem with additive experiments, however,is that overall density and species proportion are changed simul-taneously. It has therefore proved difﬁcult to separate the effectof the weed itself on crop yield from the simple effect of increas-ing total density (crop plus weed). An example is shown inFigure 8.19, describing the effects of two weeds, sicklepod(Cassia obtusifolia ) and redroot pigweed ( Amaranthus retroﬂexus ),
on the yield of cotton grown in Alabama (Buchanan et al. , 1980).
As weed density increased, so cotton yield decreased, and this effectof interspeciﬁc competition was always more pronounced withsicklepod than with redroot pigweed.
In substitutive designs the propor-
tions of competitors are varied but
total density is held constant, whilst in
•• ••
Yield (g)
4
0240083060
(a)
– Rhizobium
4
0240083060
+ Rhizobium
P
GPanicum Glycine
Relative yield total
4
0240081.0(b)
P
G+ Rhizobium
– RhizobiumNitrogen yieldDry matter yield
Figure 8.18 A substitutive experiment on interspeciﬁc competition between Panicum maximum (P), and Glycine javanica (G), in the
presence and absence of Rhizobium : (a) replacement diagrams; (b) relative yield totals. (After de Wit et al. , 1966.)Yield of cotton (103 kg ha–1)
201.001.52.02.5
10 30
Density of weeds per m2Grown with
redroot pigweed
Grown with
sicklepod
Figure 8.19 An ‘additive design’ competition experiment: the
yield of cotton produced from stands planted at constant density,
infested with weeds (either sicklepod or redroot pigweed) at arange of densities. (After Buchanan et al. , 1980.)additive experiments
response surface
analysisEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 249250 CHAPTER 8
additive designs the proportions are varied but the density of one
competitor is held constant. It is perhaps not surprising, there-fore, and certainly welcome, that a ‘response surface analysis’ has
been proposed and applied, in which two species are grown alone
and in mixtures at a wide range of densities and proportions (Figure
8.20) (Firbank & Watkinson, 1985; Law & Watkinson, 1987;Bullock et al. , 1994b; although the last of these deals with clones
of the same species). Overall, these studies suggest that good equa-tions for describing the competitive effect of one species (A) onanother (B) are, for mortality:
N
A=Ni,A[1+m(Ni,A+βNi,B)]−1(8.16)
and for fecundity:
YA=NARA[1+a(NA+αNB)]−b, (8.17)
which can both be seen to be related to Equation 5.17 (see
Section 5.8.1 – basic model of intraspeciﬁc competition) and
Equation 5.12 (see Section 8.4.1 – incorporation of interspeciﬁccompetition). Thus, N
i,Aand Ni,Bare the initial numbers of species 
A and B; NAand NBare the numbers of species A and B after 
mortality; YAis the yield (seeds or biomass) of species A; mand
aare susceptibilities to crowding; βand αare competition
coefﬁcients; RAis the basic reproductive rate of species A (and hence,
NARAis the yield in the absence of competition); and bdetermines
the type of density dependence (assumed equal to 1 for mortality
– perfect compensation). Data like those shown in Figure 8.20,obtained over a single generation, can thus be used to ﬁt values(by computer program) to the parameters in Equations 8.16 and
8.17, and the equations in their turn can be used to predict theoutcome of competition between the species over many gener-
ations – which is not possible with either substitutive or additivedesigns.
On the other hand, Law and Watkinson (1987) found that they
could obtain an improved ﬁt to their response surfaces, especiallyfor one of their species, if they used an equation in which com-petition coefﬁcients were not ﬁxed, but varied with both frequencyand density – although the meaning of this in terms of ‘plant beha-vior’ is not clear. Hence, response surface analyses, in revealingthe potential complexities in interactions between competingspecies, also reveal that knowing or predicting dynamical outcomesmay be only part of the story. It may also be necessary to under-stand the underlying mechanisms (see Section 8.10).
8.8 Evolutionary effects of interspeciﬁc
competition
8.8.1 Natural experiments
We have seen that interspeciﬁc com-
petition is commonly studied by anexperimenter comparing species aloneand in combination. Nature, too, often provides information ofthis sort: the distribution of certain potentially competing species
is such that they sometimes occur together (sympatry) andsometimes occur alone (allopatry). These ‘natural experiments’can provide additional information about interspeciﬁc competition,and especially about evolutionary effects, since the differencesbetween sympatric and allopatric populations are often of longstanding. The attractions of natural experiments are ﬁrst that they
•• ••1
x1 (log scale)(a)
2 4 10 20 40 100 2001
24
10
20
40
100
200x2 (log scale)1
010100Mean seed yield
per plot (log scale)
1
x2 (log scale)(b)
2 4 10 20 40 100 2001
24
10
20
40
100
200x1 (log scale)1
010100
Figure 8.20 The response surface 
of competition, as indicated by seed
production per pot, between (a) Phleum
arenarium and (b) Vulpia fasciculata sown
alone and in mixtures over a range of
densities and frequencies. x1and x2are the
sowing densities of Phleum and Vulpia, 
respectively. (After Law & Watkinson, 1987.)
pros and cons of
natural experimentsEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 250INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 251
arenatural – they are concerned with organisms living in their
natural habitats – and second, that they can be ‘carried out’ 
simply by observation – no difﬁcult or impracticable experimentalmanipulations are required. They have the disadvantage, how-ever, of lacking truly ‘experimental’ and ‘control’ populations.
Ideally, there should be only one difference between the popula-tions: the presence or absence of a competitor species. In practice,though, populations typically differ in other ways too, simplybecause they exist in different locations. Natural experimentsshould therefore always be interpreted cautiously.
Evidence for competition from nat-
ural experiments usually comes eitherfrom niche expansion in the absence of a competitor (known as competitive
release ) or simply from a difference in
the realized niche of a species between sympatric and allopatric
populations. If this difference is accompanied by morphologicalchanges, then the effect is referred to as character displacement . 
On the other hand, physiological, behavioral and morphologicaltraits are all equally likely to be involved in competitive interac-tions and to be reﬂections of a species’ realized niche. One difference may be that morphological distinctions are most obviously the result of evolutionary change, but as we shall see, physiological and behavioral ‘characters’ are also liable to ‘competitive displacement’.
One example of natural competit-
ive release is provided by work on 
two gerbilline rodents living in thecoastal sand dunes of Israel (Abramsky
& Sellah, 1982). In northern Israel, the protrusion of the MtCarmel ridge towards the sea separates the narrow coastal stripinto two isolated areas, north and south. Meriones tristrami is 
a gerbil that has colonized Israel from the north. It now occurs,associated with the dunes, throughout the length of the coast,including the areas both north and south of Mt Carmel. Gerbillus
allenbyi is another gerbil, also associated with the dunes and feed-
ing on similar seeds to M. tristrami ; but this species has colonized
Israel from the south and has not crossed the Mt Carmel ridge.To the north of Mt Carmel, where M. tristrami lives alone, it 
is found on sand as well as other soil types. However, south of Mt Carmel it occupies several soil types but not the coastal sand dunes. Here, only G. allenbyi occurs on dunes.
This appears to be a case of competitive exclusion and com-
petitive release: exclusion of M. tristrami by G. allenbyi from the
sand to the south of Mt Carmel; release of M. tristrami to the north.
Is this present day competitive exclusion, however, or an evolu-tionary effect? Abramsky and Sellah set up a number of plots southof Mt Carmel from which G. allenbyi was removed, and they com-
pared the densities of M. tristrami in these plots with those in 
a number of similar control plots. They monitored the plots for1 year, but the abundance of M. tristrami remained essentially
unchanged. It seems that south of Mt Carmel, M. tristrami hasevolved to select those habitats in which it avoids competition
with G. allenbyi , and that even in the absence of G. allenbyi it retains
this genetically ﬁxed preference. Note, though, as ever, that this
interpretation, because it invokes the ghost of competition past,may be sound and sensible – but it is not established fact.
A case of apparent morphological
character displacement comes fromwork on Indian mongooses. In thewestern parts of its natural range, the small Indian mongoose ( Herpestes
javanicus ) coexists with one or two
slightly larger species in the samegenus ( H. edwardsii and H. smithii ), but these species are absent
in the eastern part of its range (Figure 8.21). Simberloff et al. (2000)
examined size variation in the upper canine tooth, the animal’sprincipal prey-killing organ (note that female mongooses aresmaller than males). In the east where it occurs alone (area VIIin Figure 8.21), both males and females have larger canines thanin the western areas (III, V, VI) where it coexists with the largerspecies (Figure 8.22). This is consistent with the view that where similar but larger predators are present, the prey-catching apparatus of H. javanicus has been selected for reduced size. This
is likely to reduce the strength of competition with other species in the genus because smaller predators tend to take smaller preythan larger predators. Where H. javanicus occurs in isolation, its
canine teeth are much larger.
It is of particular interest that the small Indian mongoose was
introduced about a century ago to many islands outside its
•• ••IV
(e, j)
II
(e, s)III
(e, j, s )V
(e, j)
VI
(e, j, s )VII
(j)
I
(e, s)competitive release
and characterdisplacement
gerbils in Israel:competitive releaseFigure 8.21 Native geographic ranges (I–VII) of Herpestes
javanicus (j),H. edwardsii (e) and H. smithii (s). (From Simberloff
et al. , 2000.)
morphologicalcharacterdisplacement . . ....i n  Indian
mongooses . . .EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 251252 CHAPTER 8
native range (often as part of a naive attempt to control intro-
duced rodents). In these places, the larger competitor mongoosespecies are absent. Within 100–200 generations the small Indianmongoose has increased in size (Figure 8.22), so that the sizes ofisland individuals are now intermediate between those in the region
of origin (where they coexisted with other species and weresmall) and those in the east where they occur alone. On the islandsthey show variation consistent with ‘ecological release’ fromcompetition with larger species.
A further example concerns popula-
tions of the originally marine three-spined stickleback, Gasterosteus aculeatus ,
living in freshwater lakes in BritishColumbia, Canada, having apparently
been left behind either following uplifting of the land after
deglaciation, around 12,500 years ago, or after the subsequent rise and fall of sea levels around 11,000 years ago (Schluter &McPhail, 1992, 1993). As a result of this ‘double invasion’, somelakes now support two species of G. aculeatus (although they have
not, as yet, been given their own speciﬁc names), whilst otherssupport only one. Wherever there are two species, one is always‘limnetic’, the other ‘benthic’. The ﬁrst concentrates its feedingon plankton in the open water and has correspondingly long (and closely spaced) gill rakers that seive the plankton from thestream of ingested water. The second, with much shorter gill rakers, concentrates on larger prey that it consumes largely fromvegetation or sediments (Figure 8.23b). Wherever there is only
one species in a lake, however, this species exploits both foodresources and is morphologically intermediate (Figure 8.23a).
Presumably, either ecological character displacement has evolvedsince the second invasion, and this has promoted the coexistenceof the species pairs, or it was a necessary prerequisite for the second invasion to be successful. Genetic evidence, based on 
•• ••Asia III
Asia V
Asia VI
Asia VII
St Croix
Hawaii
Oahu
Mauritius
Viti Levu
Okinawa
2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25 3.50 3.75
Canine diameter (mm)Figure 8.22 Maximum diameter (mm) 
of the upper canine for Herpestes javanicus
in its native range (data only for areas 
III, V, VI and VII from Figure 8.21) andintroduced range. Black symbols represent
mean female size and colored symbolsrepresent mean male size. (FromSimberloff et al. , 2000.)
–0.5 –0.3 –0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5(a)
(b)One species
Two species
Ln mean gill raker length (mm). . . and in three-
spined sticklebacks in Canada
Figure 8.23 Character displacement in three-spined sticklebacks
(Gasterosteus aculeatus ). In small lakes in coastal British Columbia 
supporting two stickleback species (b), the gill rakers of the benthic 
species ( /H17033) are signiﬁcantly shorter than those of the limnetic
species ( 7), whilst those species of sticklebacks that occupy
comparable lakes alone (a) are intermediate in length. Lengths of gill rakers have been adjusted to take account of speciesdifferences in overall size. (After Schluter & McPhail, 1993.)EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 252INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 253
analyses of mitochondrial DNA of several species pairs, supports
the idea of repeated patterns of adaptive radiation within individuallakes (Rundle et al. , 2000).
If character displacement has ultimately been caused by 
competition, then the effects of competition should decline with
the degree of displacement. Brook sticklebacks ( Culaea inconstans )
that are sympatric in Canadian lakes with ninespine sticklebacks(Pungitius pungitius ) possess signiﬁcantly shorter gill rakers, longer
jaws and deeper bodies than allopatric brook sticklebacks. Grayand Robinson (2002) view allopatric brook sticklebacks as pre-displacement phenotypes and sympatric brook sticklebacks aspostdisplacement phenotypes. When each phenotype was separ-ately placed in enclosures in the presence of ninespine sticklebacks,the allopatric (predisplacement) brook sticklebacks grew signiﬁc-
antly less well than their sympatric (postdisplacement) counter-parts (Figure 8.24). This is consistent with the hypothesis that competition is reduced when divergence between competingspecies occurs.
Two ﬁnal, plausible examples of
character displacement are providedby work on mud snails in Finland(Hydrobia ulvae and H. ventrosa ) and
giant rhinoceros beetles in Southeast
Asia ( Chalcosoma caucasus and C. atlas ). When the two mud snail
species live apart, their sizes are more or less identical; but whenthey coexist they are always different in size (Figure 8.25a)(Saloniemi, 1993) and they tend to consume different food par-
ticle sizes (Fenchel 1975). The beetles display a similar morpholog-ical pattern (Figure 8.25b) (Kawano, 2002). These data, therefore,strongly suggest character displacement, allowing coexistence.However, even an apparently exemplary example such as that of
the mud snails is open to serious question (Saloniemi, 1993). InFinland, the sympatric and allopatric habitats were not identical:H. ulvae and H. ventrosa coexisted in sheltered water bodies rarely
affected by tidal action, H. ulvae was found alone in relatively
exposed tidal mudﬂats and salt marshes, and H. ventrosa was found
alone in nontidal lagoons and pools. Moreover, H. ulvae naturally
grows larger in less tidal habitats, and H. ventrosa may grow less
well in this habitat. This alone could account for the size differ-ences between sympatry and allopatry in these species. This
emphasizes the major problem with natural experiments such asthose that seem to demonstrate character displacement: sympatricand allopatric populations can occur in different environmentalconditions over which the observer has no control. Sometimesit will be these environmental differences, rather than competi-tion, that have led to the character displacement.
8.8.2 Experimenting with natural experiments
Sometimes, as we have already seen
with the gerbils, natural experimentsmay themselves provide an opportunityfor a further – and more informative –experimental manipulation. In one such case, niche divergence
was sought in clover, Trifolium repens , as a result of its having to
compete with the grass Lolium perenne (Turkington & Mehrhoff,
1990). Clover was examined from two sites: (i) a ‘two-species’ site,in which clover achieved a ground coverage of 48% and the grassachieved a coverage of 96% (the two added together exceed100% because their leaves can overlap); and (ii) a site in whichclover achieved 40% coverage, but L. perenne covered only 4%
(effectively a ‘clover-alone’ site). A total of three transplant (intothe other site) and three re-plant (back into the home site) experi-
ments were carried out (described and numbered in Figure 8.26a).T. repens , from both sites, was planted in: (i) plots at the two-species
site cleared of T. repens only; (ii) plots at the two-species site cleared
of both T. repens and L. perenne ; and (iii) plots at the clover-alone
site cleared of T. repens . The extent of competitive suppression
or release was assessed from the amount of growth achieved bythe different plantings of T. repens . From this the extent of the
evolution of niche divergence between ‘clover-alone’ and ‘two-species’ T. repens was deduced, as was that between T. repens and
L. perenne .
The T. repens population from the two-species site had indeed
apparently diverged from the L. perenne population with which
it was coexisting (and with which it may otherwise have com-
peted strongly), and had diverged too from the clover-alone 
•• ••Sympatric Allopatric–0.030.000.030.060.090.120.15Brook stickleback median growth
Figure 8.24 Means (with standard error) of group-median
growth (natural log of the ﬁnal mass of ﬁsh in each enclosure
divided by the initial mass of the group) for sympatric brooksticklebacks representing postdisplacement phenotypes (darkorange bar) and allopatric brook sticklebacks representing
predisplacement phenotypes (light bar), both reared in thepresence of ninespine sticklebacks. In competition with ninespinesticklebacks, growth was signiﬁcantly greater for postdisplacementversus predisplacement phenotypes ( P=0.012). (After Gray & 
Robinson, 2002.)mud snails: a classic
example of characterdisplacement?
niche divergence inclover–grasscompetitionEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 253254 CHAPTER 8
population (Figure 8.26b). When the two-species site was 
cleared of T. repens only, the re-planted T. repens grew better 
than the trans planted clover-alone plants (treatments 1 and 4, 
respectively; P=0.086, close to signiﬁcance), suggesting that 
the transplanted plants were competing more with the resident 
L. perenne . Moreover, when L. perenne was also removed, this made
no difference to the two-species T. repens (treatments 4 and 5; 
P>0.9), but led to a large increase in the growth of the clover-
alone plants (treatments 1 and 2; P<0.005). Also, when L. perenne
was removed, the clover-alone plants grew better than the two-species ones (treatments 2 and 5; P<0.05) – all of which suggests
that only the clover-alone plants were released from competitionby the absence of L. perenne . Finally, at the clover-alone site, the
two-species clover plants grew no better than they had at theirhome site (treatments 4 and 6; P>0.7), whereas the clover-alone
plants grew far better than they had at the two-species site in the
presence of the grass (treatments 1 and 3; P<0.05). Thus, the clover
from the two-species population hardly competes with the L. perenne
with which it coexists, whereas the clover-alone population
would do – and does so if transplanted to the two-species site.
8.8.3 Selection experiments
The most direct way of demonstrating
the evolutionary effects of competitionwithin a pair of competing species is for the experimenter to induce these
•• ••W. Java
Location405060708090
C. Java
E. Java
Lampung
S. Sumatra
NiasW. SumatraKerinci
C. Malay
E. Thailand
C. Thailand
W. Thailand
E. Laos
C. Sulawesi
N. Sulawesi
Leyte
E. Mindanao
C. Mindanao
W. MindanaoC. caucasus
C. atlas(a)Mean length (mm)
123456
0.0 0.0 1.5 4.1 4.3 10.7 26.3 40.3 84.1 93.1 97.5
0.0 0.2 2.1 4.3 9.3 24.2 27.5 45.0 92.2 93.3H. ulvae
H. ventrosa
Percentage H. ventrosaBody length (mm)(b)
Figure 8.25 Character displacement 
in body size. (a) Mud snails in Finland
(average lengths of Hydrobia ulvae and 
H. ventrosa , arranged in order of increasing
percentage of H. ventrosa ). (After Saloniemi,
1993.) (b) Giant rhinoceros beetles in
southeast Asia (average lengths ofChalcosoma caucasus and C. atlas ). (After
Kawano, 2002.) In each case in allopatry,body sizes overlap broadly, but insympatry body sizes are signiﬁcantlydifferent.
direct demonstrations
of evolutionaryeffects of competitionhave been rareEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 254INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 255
effects – to impose the selection pressure (competition) and
observe the outcome. Surprisingly perhaps, there have been veryfew successful experiments of this type. In some cases, a specieshas responded to the selection pressure applied by a second,competitor species by apparently increasing its ‘competitive 
ability’, in the sense of increasing its frequency within a joint population. An example of this with two species of Drosophila is
shown in Figure 8.27. Such results, however, tell us nothing aboutthe means by which such apparent increases were achieved (e.g.whether it was as a result of niche differentiation).
To ﬁnd an example of a demonstrable increase in niche 
differentiation giving rise to coexistence of competitors in aselection experiment, we must turn away from interspeciﬁc
competition in the strictest sense to competition between threetypes of the same bacterial species, Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens ,
which behave as separate species because they reproduce asexu-ally (Rainey & Trevisano, 1998). The three types are named
‘smooth’ (SM), ‘wrinkly spreader’ (WS) and ‘fuzzy spreader’ (FS)on the basis of the morphology of their colonies plated out onsolid medium. In liquid medium, they also occupy quite differ-ent parts of the culture vessel (Figure 8.28a). In vessels that werecontinually shaken, so that no separate niches for the differenttypes could be established, an initially pure culture of SM indi-viduals retained its purity (Figure 8.28b). But in the absence 
•• ••3
–T
Total dry weight (g)
0123
Treatment number(b)
Lolium perenne  naturally absent(a)
‘Clover alone’ site
6
–T
5
–T–L
4
–T1
–T2
–T–L
Lolium perenne -dominated site‘Two species’ site
142536‘Two species’
site‘Clover alone’
site
Remove
TrifoliumRemove grass
and TrifoliumRemove
TrifoliumFigure 8.26 (a) Experimental design to
test for the evolution of Trifolium repens
(T) in competition with Lolium perenne (L).
Indigenous populations of T. repens , and
sometimes also L. perenne , were removed.
Trifolium repens was removed from the 
base of the arrow and transplanted, or
replanted, at the head of the arrow.Treatment numbers are consistent with theusage of Connell (1980). (b) The results ofthis experiment are in terms of the totalplot dry weight achieved by T. repens in the
various treatments. Signiﬁcance levels forcomparisons between pairs of treatments
are given in the text. (After Turkington &Mehrhoff, 1990.)
Figure 8.27 Apparent evolution of
competitive ability in Drosophila serrata . 
(a) Of two experimental populations
coexisting (and competing) with D.
nebulosa , one (I) increased markedly 
in frequency after around week 20. (b) Individuals from this population did better in further competition with D. nebulosa (( ), mean of ﬁve
populations) than did individuals frompopulation II (( ), mean of ﬁve), orindividuals from a stock not previouslysubjected to interspeciﬁc competition(( ), mean of ﬁve). (After Ayala, 1969.)
D. serrata (%)
300
0100
12
Weeks(a)
90
8070
60
5040302010
2724211815 963III
120
080
Weeks(b)
70
60
50
40302010
9 6 3EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 255256 CHAPTER 8
of shaking, mutant WS and FS types invaded and established 
(Figure 8.28c). Furthermore, it was possible to determine the com-petitive abilities of the different types, when rare, to invade purecultures of the other types (Figure 8.28d). Five of six possible inva-sions are favored. The exception – WS repels the invasion of FS
– is unlikely to lead to the elimination of FS, because FS can invadecultures of SM, and SM can invade cultures of WS. In general,however, the experimental selection of increased niche differen-tiation amongst competing species appears to be either frustrat-ingly elusive or sadly neglected.8.9 Niche differentiation and similarity 
amongst coexisting competitors
It might be imagined that scientiﬁc progress is made by providing
answers to questions. In fact, progress often consists of replacingone question with another, more pertinent, more challenging question. In this section, we deal with an area where this is thecase: the questions of how different coexisting competitors are,
and how different coexisting species need to be if competition is
not to eliminate one of them.
•• ••
10 01010
109
108
107
106
2468(b)
10 01010
109
108
107
106
2468(c)
(d)Time (day)Number of bacteria (ml–1)
1.501.701.460.001.662.20
SMWS
FSFigure 8.28 (a) Pure cultures of three
types of the bacterium, Pseudomonas
ﬂuorescens (smooth, SM, wrinkly spreader,
WS, and fuzzy spreader, FS) concentrate
their growth in different parts of 
a liquid culture vessel. (b) In shakenculture vessels, pure SM cultures aremaintained. Bars represent standard errors.(c) But in unshaken, initially pure SMcultures (
/H17033), WS ( /H17009) and FS ( /H17039) mutants
arise, invade and establish. Bars represent
standard errors. (d) The competitiveabilities (relative rates of increase) when aninitially rare type (foot of the arrow)
invades a pure colony of another type(head of the arrow). Hence, values >1
indicate an ability to invade (superiorcompetitor when rare) and values <1 an
inability. (After Rainey & Trevisano, 1998.Reproduced by permission of Nature.)EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 256INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 257
The Lotka–Volterra model predicts the stable coexistence of
competitors in situations where interspeciﬁc competition is, for
both species, less signiﬁcant than intraspeciﬁc competition. Nichedifferentiation will obviously tend to concentrate competitive effectsmore within species than between them. The Lotka–Volterra
model, and the Competitive Exclusion Principle, therefore implythat any amount of niche differentiation will allow the stable 
coexistence of competitors. Hence, in an attempt to discoverwhether this was ‘true’, the question ‘do competing species needto be different in order to coexist stably?’ greatly exercised the minds
of ecologists during the 1940s (Kingsland, 1985).
It is easy to see now, however, 
that the question is badly put, since itleaves the precise meaning of ‘different’
undeﬁned. We have seen examples inwhich the coexistence of competitors is apparently associated with some
degree of niche differentiation, but it seems that if we look
closely enough, all coexisting species will be found to be different– without this having anything to do with competition. A morepertinent question, therefore, would be ‘is there a minimumamount of niche differentiation that has to be exceeded for stable coexistence?’ That is, is there a limit to the similarity of coexisting species?
One inﬂuential attempt to answer this question for exploitat-
ive competition, based on variants of the Lotka–Volterra model,was initiated by MacArthur and Levins (1967) and developed 
by May (1973). With hindsight, their approach is certainly opento question (Abrams, 1983). Nevertheless, we can learn most about the ‘limiting similarity problem’ by ﬁrst examining theirapproach and then looking at the objections to it. Here, as so often,the models can be instructive without being ‘right’.Imagine three species competing
for a resource that is unidimensional and
is distributed continuously; food size isa clear example. Each species has its ownrealized niche in this single dimension,
which can be visualized as a resource-utilization curve (Figure 8.29).The consumption rate of each species is highest at the center of its niche and tails off to zero at either end, and the more theutilization curves of adjacent species overlap, the more the speciescompete. Indeed, by assuming that the curves are ‘normal’ distribu-tions (in the statistical sense), and that the different species havesimilarly shaped curves, the competition coefﬁcient (applicable toboth adjacent species) can be expressed by the following formula:
α= e
−d2/4w2(8.18)
where wis the standard deviation (or, roughly, ‘relative width’)
of the curves, and dis the distance between the adjacent peaks.
Thus, αis very small when there is considerable separation 
of adjacent curves ( d/w>>1; Figure 8.29a), and approaches 
unity as the curves themselves approach one another ( d/w<1;
Figure 8.29b).
How much overlap of adjacent utilization curves is com-
patible with stable coexistence? Assume that the two peripheralspecies have the same carrying capacity ( K
1, representing the
suitability of the available resources for species 1 and 3) and 
consider the coexistence, in between them on the resource axis,of another species (carrying capacity K
2). When d/wis low ( αis
high and the species are similar) the conditions for coexistenceare extremely restrictive in terms of the K
1:K2ratio; but these
restrictions lift rapidly as d/wapproaches and exceeds unity
(Figure 8.30). In other words, coexistence is possible when d/w
•• ••
Resource
utilizationefficiencySpecies
1(a)
Species
3
Resource state (food particle size, for instance)Species
2
w wdd
Species
1(b)
Species
3
Resource stateSpecies
2
wdd
w
Figure 8.29 Resource-utilization curves for three species coexisting along a one-dimensional resource spectrum. dis the distance between
adjacent curve peaks and wis the standard deviation of the curves. (a) Narrow niches with little overlap ( d>w), i.e. relatively little
interspeciﬁc competition. (b) Broader niches with greater overlap ( d<w), i.e. relatively intense interspeciﬁc competition.
how much niche
differentiation isneeded forcoexistence?a simple modelprovides a simpleanswer . . .EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 257258 CHAPTER 8
is low, but only if the suitabilities of the environment for the dif-
ferent species are extremely ﬁnely balanced. Furthermore, if theenvironment is assumed to vary, then the ﬂuctuations will leadto variations in the K
1:K2ratio, and coexistence will now only
be possible if there is a broad range of K1:K2ratios leading to 
stability, i.e. if, roughly, d/w>1.
This model, then, suggests that
there isa limit to the similarity of
coexisting competitors, and that the
limit is given by the condition d/w>1.
Are these the correct answers? In fact, it seems most unlikely thatthere is a universal limit to similarity, or even a widely applica-ble one that we could express in such a simple way as d/w>1.
Abrams (1976, 1983), amongst others, has emphasized that modelswith competition in several dimensions, with alternative utilizationcurves and so on, all lead to alternative limits to similarity, andoften to much lower values of d/wbeing compatible with 
robust, stable coexistence. In other words, ‘ d/w>1’ is a property
of one type of model analysis, but not of others, and thus, almost
certainly, not of nature as a whole. Furthermore, we have alreadyseen that because of environmental heterogeneity, apparentcompetition and so on, exploitative competition and any nichedifferentiation associated with it are not necessarily the whole story when it comes to the coexistence of competitors. This tooargues against the idea of a universal limit.
On the other hand, the most general messages from the early
models still seem valid, namely: (i) in the real world, with all itsintrinsic variability, there arelikely to be limits to the similarity
of coexisting exploitative competitors; and (ii) these limits will reﬂectnot only the differences between species, but also the variabilitywithin them, the nature of the resource, the nature of the util-
ization curve and so on.But is even the limiting similarity
question the best question to ask? 
We want to understand the extent ofniche differentiation amongst coexistingspecies. If species were always packed as tightly together as theycould be, then presumably they would differ by the minimum(limiting) amount. But why should they be? We return, once again,to the distinction between the ecological and the evolutionary con-sequences of competition (Abrams, 1990). The ecological effectsare that species with ‘inappropriate’ niches will be eliminated (or repelled if they try to invade), and the limiting similarity ques-tion implicitly concerned itself with this: how many species 
can be ‘packed in’? But coexisting competitors may also evolve.Do we generally observe the ecological effects, or the combinedecological and evolutionary effects? Do they differ? We cannotattempt to answer the ﬁrst question without answering the sec-ond, and the answer to that seems to be, perhaps inevitably, ‘itdepends’. Different models, based on different underlying mech-anisms in the competitive process, predict that evolution will leadto more widely spaced niches, or to more closely packed nichesor to much the same disposition of niches as those predicted by
ecological processes alone (Abrams, 1990).
Two points, therefore, emerge from this discussion. The ﬁrst
is that it has been entirely theoretical. This is a reﬂection of thesecond point, which is that we have seen progress – but in termsof successive questions superseding their predecessors ratherthan actually answering them. Data provide answers – what wehave seen is a reﬁnement of questions. The latest stage in thisappears to be that attempts to answer questions regarding ‘niche
similarity’ may need to be postponed until we know more aboutresource distributions, utilization curves and, more generally, themechanisms underlying exploitative competition. It is to these thatwe now turn.
8.10 Niche differentiation and mechanisms 
of exploitation
In spite of all the difﬁculties of making a direct connection between
interspeciﬁc competition and niche differentiation, there is no doubtthat niche differentiation is often the basis for the coexistence ofspecies.
There are a number of ways in
which niches can be differentiated. One
is resource partitioning or, more gen-erally, differential resource utilization.This can be observed when species living in precisely the same habitatnevertheless utilize different resources.Since the majority of resources for animals are individuals of otherspecies (of which there are literally millions of types), or parts ofindividuals, there is no difﬁculty, in principle, in imagining how
•• ••. . . that is almost
certainly wrong
K1/K2
3 2 10012
d/wUnstable
UnstableStable
Figure 8.30 The range of habitat favorabilities (indicated by the
carrying capacities K1and K2, where K1=K3) that permit a three-
species equilibrium community with various degrees of niche
overlap ( d/w). (After May, 1973.)the answer? 
it depends
niche differentiation...
. . . easy to imaginein animals, less easyin plants . . .EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 258INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 259
competing animals might partition resources amongst them-
selves. Plants, on the other hand, all have very similar require-ments for the same potentially limited resources (see Chapter 3),and there is much less apparent scope for resource partitioning(but see below).
In many cases, the resources used by ecologically similar
species are separated spatially. Differential resource utilization will
then express itself as either microhabitat differentiation betweenthe species (e.g. different species of ﬁsh feeding at different depths),or even a difference in geographic distribution. Alternatively, theavailability of the different resources may be separated in time;for example, different resources may become available at differ-ent times of the day or in different seasons. Differential resourceutilization may then express itself as a temporal separation
between the species.
The other major way in which
niches can be differentiated is on thebasis of conditions (Wilson, 1999). Twospecies may use precisely the sameresources, but if their ability to do so is
inﬂuenced by environmental conditions (as it is bound to be), andif they respond differently to those conditions, then each may becompetitively superior in different environments. This too canexpress itself as a microhabitat differentiation, or a difference ingeographic distribution or a temporal separation, depending onwhether the appropriate conditions vary on a small spatial scale,a large spatial scale or over time. Of course, in a number of 
cases (especially with plants) it is not easy to distinguish betweenconditions and resources (see Chapter 3). Niches may then be differentiated on the basis of a factor (such as water) which is both a resource and a condition.
There are many examples of the
separation of competing species inspace or time involving both animalsand plants. For example, tadpoles of
two anuran species in New Jersey, USA ( Hyla crucifer and Bufo wood-
housii ), have their feeding periods offset by around 4–6 weeks each
year, apparently, though not certainly, associated with differen-tial responses to environmental conditions rather than seasonalchanges in resources (Lawler & Morin, 1993). Two coexistingspecies of spiny mice in rocky deserts in Israel partition activityon a diel basis: Acomys cahirinus is nocturnal and A. russatus is 
diurnal, although the latter becomes nocturnal if its congener isremoved ( Jones et al. , 2001). Two phloem-feeding bark beetles,
Ips duplicatus and I. typographus , on Norway spruce trees, in
Norway, are separated in their feeding sites on a small spatial scaleby trunk diameter, although the reason for this is not at all clear(Schlyter & Anderbrandt, 1993). But, it is amongst plants and othersessile organisms, because of their limited scope for differentialresource utilization at the same location and instant, that spatialand temporal separation are likely to be of particular signiﬁcance(see Harper, 1977). Although, as ever, it is one thing to show thatspecies differ in their spatial or temporal distribution – it is quiteanother to prove that this has anything to do with competition.The cattails in Section 8.3.3 provide one example of competingplants separated spatially. Another is shown in Figure 8.31, concerning the annuals Sedum smallii and Minuartia uniﬂora that
dominate the vegetation growing on granite outcrops in south-eastern USA. The adult plants exhibit an especially clear spatialzonation associated with soil depth (itself strongly correlatedwith soil moisture), and further experimental results reinforce theidea that it is competition rather than mere differences in toler-ance that gives rise to this zonation.
Describing the outcome of competition, however – ‘one species
coexists with or excludes another’ – and even associating this withniche differentiation, whether based on resources themselves, or conditions or merely differences in space or time, actually provides us with rather little understanding of the competitive process. For this, as we have seen repeatedly in this chapter, wemay need to focus more on the mechanisms of exploitation. How ,
precisely, does one species outexploit and outcompete another?How can two consumers coexist on two limiting resources, when
both resources are absolutely essential to both consumers?
•• ••Soil depth (cm)Minuartia unifloraSedum smalliiIndividuals per dm2Individuals per dm28 6 200300400
4Seedling200
100
10 12 14Rosette
Flowering
Mature
8 6 2004Seedling200
100
10 12 14Rosette
Flowering
Mature
Figure 8.31 The zonation of individuals, according to soil depth,
of two annual plants, Sedum smallii and Minuartia uniﬂora at four
stages of the life cycle. (After Sharitz & McCormick, 1973.). . . based on
resources andconditions
spatial and temporalseparationEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 259260 CHAPTER 8
Furthermore, as Tilman (1990) has
pointed out, whilst monitoring the
population dynamics of two competing
species may give us some powers of prediction for the next timethey compete, it will give us very little help in predicting how
each would fare against a third species. Whereas, if we understoodthe dynamics of the interaction of all the species with theirshared limiting resources, then we might be able to predict theoutcome of exploitative competition between any given pair ofthe species. We therefore turn now to some attempts to explainthe coexistence of species competing for limiting resources thatexplicitly consider not only the dynamics of the competingspecies but also the dynamics of the resources themselves. Ratherthan going into details, we examine the outlines of models and
some major conclusions.
8.10.1 Exploitation of a single resource
Tilman (1990) shows, for a number of
models, what we have already seendemonstrated empirically in Section
8.2.6, that when two species compete exploitatively for a singlelimiting resource the outcome is determined by which species is
able, in its exploitation, to reduce the resource to the lower equi-librium concentration, R*. (Satisfyingly, for apparent competition
the reverse is true: the prey or host able to support the greatest
abundance of predators or parasites is the winner (see, for example,Begon & Bowers, 1995) – a prediction we have seen borne outin Figure 8.17.)
Different models, based on varying details in the mechanism
of exploitation, give rise to different formulae for R*, but even
the simplest model is revealing, giving:
R
i*=miCi/(gi−mi). (8.19)
Here miis the mortality or loss rate of consumer species i; Ciis
the resource concentration at which species iattains a rate of growth
and reproduction per unit biomass (relative rate of increase, RRI)
equal to half its maximal RRI ( Ciis thus highest in consumers that
require the most resource in order to grow rapidly); and giis the
maximum RRI achievable by species i. This suggests that success-
ful exploitative competitors (low Ri*) are those that combine
resource-utilization efﬁciency (low Ci), low rates of loss (low mi)
and high rates of increase (high gi). On the other hand, it may
not be possible for an organism to combine, say, low Ciand high
gi. A plant’s growth will be most enhanced by putting its matter
and energy into leaves and photosynthesis – but to enhance itsnutrient-utilization efﬁciency it would have to put these into roots.A lioness will be best able to subsist at low densities of prey bybeing ﬂeet-footed and maneuverable – but this may be difﬁcult
if she is often heavily pregnant. Understanding successful exploit-ative competitiveness, therefore, may require us ultimately tounderstand how organisms trade off features giving rise to low
values of R*against features that enhance other aspects of ﬁtness.
A rare test of these ideas is provided
by Tilman’s own work on terrestrialplants competing for nitrogen (Tilman& Wedin, 1991a, 1991b). Five grass species were grown alone ina range of experimental conditions that gave rise in turn to a rangeof nitrogen concentrations. Two species, Schizachyrium scoparium
and Andropogon gerardi , consistently reduced the nitrate and
ammonium concentrations in soil solutions to lower values thanthose achieved by the other three species (in all soils but thosewith the very highest nitrogen levels). Of these three otherspecies, one, Agrostis scabra , left behind higher concentrations than
the other two, Agropyron repens and Poa pratensis . Then, when 
A. scabra was grown with A. repens , S. scoparium and A. gerardi , the
results, especially at low nitrogen concentrations where nitrogenwas most likely to be limiting, were very much in line with theexploitative competition theory (Figure 8.32). The species that couldreduce nitrogen to the lowest concentration always won – A. scabra
was always competitively displaced. A similar result has beenobtained for the nocturnal, insectivorous gecko Hemidactylus 
frenatus , an invader of urban habitats across the Paciﬁc basin, where
it is responsible for population declines of the native gecko
Lepidodactylus lugubris . Petren and Case (1996) established that
insects are a limiting resource for both. The invader is capable of depleting insect resources in experimental enclosures to lowerlevels than the native gecko, and the latter suffers reductions inbody condition, fecundity and survivorship as a result.
Returning to Tilman’s grasses, the ﬁve species were chosen
from various points in a typical old-ﬁeld successional sequence in Minnesota (Figure 8.33a), and it is clear that the better com-petitors for nitrogen are found later in the sequence. Thesespecies, and S. scoparium and A. gerardi in particular, had higher
root allocations, but lower above-ground vegetative growth
rates and reproductive allocations (e.g. Figure 8.33b). In otherwords, they achieved their low values of R*by the high
resource-utilization efﬁciency given to them by their roots (lowC
i, Equation 8.19), even though they appeared to have paid for
this through a reduction in growth and reproductive rates (lower
gi). In fact, over all the species, a full 73% of the variance in the
eventual soil nitrate concentration was explained by variations inroot mass (Tilman & Wedin, 1991a). This successional sequence(see Section 16.4 for a much fuller discussion of succession)therefore appears to be one in which fast growers and reproducers
are replaced by efﬁcient and powerful exploiters and competitors.
8.10.2 Exploitation of two resources
Tilman (1982, 1986; see also Section 3.8)
has also considered what happens when two competitors compete for tworesources. Beginning with intra speciﬁc
•• ••the need to consider
resource dynamics
a model for a singleresource . . .. . . tested on grasses
a model for tworesources – the zeronet isocline: a nicheboundaryEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 260INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 261
competition, we can deﬁne a zero net growth isocline for a 
single species utilizing two essential resources (see Section 3.8).This isocline is the boundary between resource combinations that allow the species to survive and reproduce, and resource combinations that do not (Figure 8.34), and therefore represents
the boundary of the species’ niche in these two dimensions. Forpresent purposes, we can ignore the complications of overcom-pensation, chaos, etc. and assume that intraspeciﬁc competitionbrings the population to a stable equilibrium. Here, however, theequilibrium has two components: both population size and theresource levels should remain constant. Population size is con-stant (by deﬁnition) at all points on the isocline, and Tilman estab-lished that there is only one point on the isocline where resourcelevels are also constant (point S*in Figure 8.34). This point, which
is the two-resource equivalent of R*for one resource, represents
a balance between the consumption of the resources by the con-
sumer (taking the resource concentrations towards the bottomleft of the ﬁgure) and the natural renewal of the resources (takingthe concentrations towards the top right). Indeed, in the absenceof the consumer, resource renewal would take the resource con-centrations to the ‘supply point’, shown in the ﬁgure.To move from intra- to interspeciﬁc competition, it is neces-
sary to superimpose the isoclines of two species on the same 
diagram (Figure 8.35). The two species will presumably have different consumption rates, but there will still be a single supplypoint. The outcome depends on the position of this supply point.
In Figure 8.35a, the isocline of spe-
cies A is closer to both axes than that
of species B. There are three regions in which the supply point might befound. If it was in region 1, below the isoclines of both species,then there would never be sufﬁcient resources for either speciesand neither would survive. If it was in region 2, below the iso-cline of species B but above that of species A, then species B wouldbe unable to survive and the system would equilibrate on the 
isocline of species A. If the supply point was in region 3, then this system too would equilibrate on the isocline of species A.Analogous to the one-resource case, species A would competi-tively exclude species B because of its ability to exploit bothresources down to levels at which species B could not survive.Of course, the outcome would be reversed if the positions of theisoclines were reversed.
•• ••
 Biomass (g m–2)N level 2
Seedlings01986 1987 1988400
200
100
50
20
10
5
2
1N level 2
Seedlings01986 1987 1988400
200
100
50
20
10
5
2
1N level 1
Seedlings01986 1987 1988400
200
100
50
20
10
5
2
1(b)
N level 2
198601987 1988 1990150
50
1989100
Year Year Year
20%
50%80%N level 1
198601987 1988 199050
25(c)
1989 Biomass (g m–2)N level 1
Seedlings01986 1987 1988400
200
100
50
20
10
5
2
1(a)
Figure 8.32 The results of competition experiments in which Agrostis scabra (black lines) was competitively displaced by (a) Schizachyrium
scoparium , (b) Andropogon gerardi and (c) Agropyron repens (orange lines, at each of two nitrogen levels (both low) and whether it
represented 20, 50 or 80% of the initial seed sown. In each case, A. scabra had lower values of R*for nitrate and ammonium (see text).
Displacement was least rapid in ( c) where the differential was least marked. (After Tilman & Wedin, 1991b.)
a superior and an
inferior competitorEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 261•• ••262 CHAPTER 8
Relative abundance (% cover)
60 40 1000102025
20
Successional age (years)(a)
15
5
50 30Agropyron
repens
Agrostis
scabraSchizachyrium
scoparium
Andropogon
gerardiPoa pratensis
1200 30000268
600(b)
4
900AgrostisRoot : shoot ratio
1200 30000268
6004
900Agropyron
1200 30000268
600
Total soil nitrogen (N) (mg kg–1)4
900Poa1200 30000268
6004
900Schizachyrium
Total soil nitrogen (N) (mg kg–1)1200 30000268
6004
900Andropogon
XY
S*Supply
point
Survives and
reproduces
Does not survive and reproduceZero net
growthisoclineFigure 8.33 (a) The relative abundances of ﬁve grasses during old-ﬁeld successions at Cedar Creek Natural History Area, Minnesota,
USA. (b) The root : shoot ratios were generally higher in the later successional species and declined as soil nitrogen increased.  (After
Tilman & Wedin, 1991a.)
Figure 8.34 (left) The zero net growth isocline of a species
potentially limited by two resources (X and Y), divides resource
combinations on which the species can survive and reproduce,from those on which it cannot. The isocline is rectangular in thiscase because X and Y are essential resources (see Section 3.8.1).
Point S*is the only point on the isocline at which there is also no
net change in resource concentrations (consumption and resourcerenewal are equal and opposite). In the absence of the consumer,resource renewal would take the resource concentrations to the‘supply point’ shown.EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 262••INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 263
In Figure 8.35b the isoclines of the
two species overlap, and there are six
regions in which the supply pointmight be found. Points in region 1 arebelow both isoclines and would allow
neither species to exist; those in region2 are below the isocline of species B and
would only allow species A to exist; and those in region 6 are belowthe isocline of species A and would only allow species B to exist.Regions 3, 4 and 5 lie within the fundamental niches of both species.However, the outcome of competition depends on which ofthese regions the supply point is located in.
The most crucial region in Figure 8.35b is region 4. For sup-
ply points here, the resource levels are such that species A is more
limited by resource X than by resource Y, whilst species B is morelimited by Y than X. However, species A consumes more X thanY, whilst species B consumes more Y than X. Because eachspecies consumes more of the resource that more limits its owngrowth, the system equilibrates at the intersection of the two isoclines, and this equilibrium is stable: the species coexist.
This is niche differentiation, but 
of a subtle kind. Rather than the twospecies exploiting different resources,species A disproportionately limits itselfby its exploitation of resource X, whilstspecies B disproportionately limits itselfby its exploitation of resource Y. The
result is the coexistence of competi-
tors. By contrast, for supply points in region 3, both species aremore limited by Y than X. But species A can reduce the level ofY to a point on its own isocline below species B’s isocline, where
species B cannot exist. Conversely, for supply points in region 5,both species are more limited by X than Y, but species Bdepresses X to a point below species A’s isocline. Thus, inregions 3 and 5, the supply of resources favors one species or the
other, and there is competitive exclusion.
It seems then that two species can compete for two resources
and coexist as long as two conditions are met.
1The habitat (i.e. the supply point) must be such that one species
is more limited by one resource, and the other species morelimited by the other resource.
2Each species must consume more of the resource that 
more limits its own growth. Thus, it is possible, in principle,to understand coexistence in competing plants on the basis of differential resource utilization. The key seems to be anexplicit consideration of the dynamics of the resources as wellas the dynamics of the competing species. As with other casesof coexistence by niche differentiation, the essence is thatintraspeciﬁc competition is, for both species, a more power-ful force than interspeciﬁc competition.
The best evidence for the validity of the model comes fromTilman’s own experimental laboratory work on competitionbetween the diatoms Asterionella formosa and Cyclotella meneghiniana
(Tilman, 1977). For both species, Tilman observed directly the con-sumption rates and the isoclines for both phosphate and silicate.
He then used these to predict the outcome of competition witha range of resource supply points (Figure 8.35). Finally, he ran anumber of competition experiments with a variety of supply
••X
Y(b)
ZNGIBZNGIA
1234
5
6X
Y(a)
ZNGIAZNGIB
123
Figure 8.35 (a) Competitive exclusion: the isocline (zero net growth isocline, ZNGI) of species A lies closer to the resource axes than the
isocline of species B. If the resource supply point is in region 1, then neither species can exist. But if the resource supply point is in regions
2 or 3, then species A reduces the resource concentrations to a point on its own isocline (where species B cannot survive and r eproduce):
species A excludes species B. (b) Potential coexistence of two competitors limited by two essential resources. The isoclines of  species A and
B overlap, leading to six regions of interest. With supply points in region 1 neither species can exist; with points in regions  2 and 3, species
A excludes species B; and with points in regions 5 and 6, species B excludes species A. Region 4 contains supply points lying b etween the
limits deﬁned by the two dashed lines. With supply points in region 4 the two species coexist. For further discussion, see text .
coexistence –
dependent on theratio of resourcelevels at the supplypoint
subtle nichedifferentiation – eachspecies consumesmore of the resourcethat more limits itsown growthEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 263264 CHAPTER 8
points, and the results of these are illustrated in Figure 8.36. In
most cases the results conﬁrmed the predictions. In the two that did not, the supply points were very close to the regionalboundary. The results are therefore encouraging. However, it hasproved extremely difﬁcult to transfer this approach from the 
laboratory, where supply points can be manipulated, to naturalpopulations, where they cannot, and where even the estimationof supply points has proved practically impossible (Sommer,1990). There is considerable need for consolidation and extensionfrom work on other types of plants and animals.
8.10.3 Exploitation of more than two resources
We have seen how two diatom species
may coexist in the laboratory on twoshared limiting resources. In fact,Tilman’s resource competition theorypredicts that the diversity of coexisting
species should be proportional to the
total number of resources in a system that are at physiologicallimiting levels: the more limiting resources, the more coexisting
competitors. Interlandi and Kilham (2001) tested this hypothesisdirectly in three lakes in the Yellowstone region of Wyoming, USAusing an index (Simpson’s index) of the species diversity of phytoplankton there (diatoms and other species). If one speciesexists on its own, the index equals 1; in a group of species wherebiomass is strongly dominated by a single species, the index will be close to 1; when two species exist at equal biomass, theindex is 2; and so on. According to resource competition theory,this index should therefore increase in direct proportion to thenumber of resources limiting growth. The spatial and temporalpatterns in phytoplankton diversity in the three lakes for 1996 and1997 are shown in Figure 8.37. The principal limiting resourcesfor phytoplankton growth are nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon andlight. These parameters were measured at the same depths andtimes that the phytoplankton were sampled, and it was noted whereand when any of the potential limiting factors actually occurred at
levels below threshold limits for growth. Consistent with resourcecompetition theory, species diversity increased as the number ofresources at physiologically limiting levels increased (Figure 8.38).
These results suggest that even in the highly dynamic envir-
onments of lakes where equilibrium conditions are rare, resource
competition plays a role in continuously structuring the phyto-plankton community. It is heartening that the results of experi-ments performed in the artiﬁcial world of the laboratory are echoedhere in the much more complex natural environment.
Our survey of interspeciﬁc competition has concluded with a
realization that we need to understand much more about the mech-anisms underlying the interactions between consumers and theirresources. If these resources are alive, then we normally refer tosuch interactions as predation; and if they were alive once, butare now dead, we refer to them as detritivory. It would seem,therefore, that the distinction normally made between competi-
tion and predation is, in a very real sense, an artiﬁcial one (Tilman,1990). None the less, having dealt with competition here, we turnnext, in a separate series of chapters, to predation and detritivory.
Summary
In interspeciﬁc competition, individuals of one species suffer a reduc-
tion in fecundity, growth or survivorship as a result of resourceexploitation or interference by individuals of another species.Competing species may exclude one another from particularhabitats so that they do not coexist, or may coexist, perhaps by
utilizing the habitat in slightly different ways. Interspeciﬁc com-petition is frequently highly asymmetric.
Although species may not be competing now, their ancestors
may have done so in the past. Species may have evolved characteristics that ensure they compete less, or not at all, withother species. Moreover, species whose niches appear differenti-ated may have evolved independently and, in fact, never have 
•• ••Cyclotella wins
Asterionella wins
Stable coexistenceConcentration of PO4 (µmol l–1)
100 60 2000245
40
Concentration of SiO2 (µmol l–1)3
1
80Asterionella  winsStable coexistenceCyclotella
wins
Figure 8.36 The observed isoclines and consumption vectors of
two diatom species, Asterionella formosa and Cyclotella meneghiniana ,
were used to predict the outcome of competition between them
for silicate and phosphate. The predictions were then tested in aseries of experiments, the outcomes of which are depicted by the
symbols explained in the key. Most experiments conﬁrmed thepredictions, with the exception of two lying close to the regionalboundary. (After Tilman, 1977, 1982.)
the more limiting
resources there are,the more species maycoexistEIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 264INTERSPECIFIC COMPETITION 265
competed, now or historically. An experimental manipulation (for
instance, the removal of one or more species) can indicate thepresence of current competition if it leads to an increase in thefecundity or survival or abundance of the remaining species. But negative results would be equally compatible with the past
elimination of species by competition, the evolutionary avoidanceof competition in the past, and the independent evolution of noncompeting species.
Mathematical models, most notably the Lotka–Volterra
model, have provided important insights into the circumstancesthat permit the coexistence of competitors, and those that leadto competitive exclusion. However, the simpliﬁed assumptionsof the Lotka–Volterra model limit its applicability to real situa-tions in nature. We know from other models and experimentsthat the outcome of interspeciﬁc competition can be stronglyinﬂuenced by heterogeneous, inconstant or unpredictable envir-
onments. Coexistence of a superior and an inferior competitor ona patchy and ephemeral resource can occur if the two species haveindependent, aggregated distributions over the available patches.
We describe the range of approaches used to study both the
ecological and evolutionary effects of interspeciﬁc competition,paying particular attention to experiments in the laboratory orﬁeld (e.g. substitutive, additive, response surface analysis) and nat-ural experiments (e.g. comparing niche dimensions of species insympatry and allopatry). The important question of whether a
minimum amount of niche differentiation is required for stablecoexistence is much easier to pose than answer.
The chapter concludes by acknowledging the need to consider
not just the population dynamics of the competing populationsbut also the dynamics of the resources for which they are com-peting, if we wish to achieve a full understanding of interspeciﬁccompetition and species coexistence.
•• ••
Depth (m)
50250
M J J A S M J J A S3015025100
MonthSimpson’s
Diversity
Index96>> 97>>7
5
1
6
4
1
6
4
1Lewis
Jackson
Yellowstone
Figure 8.37 Variation in phytoplankton
species diversity (Simpson’s index) with
depth in 2 years in three large lakes in theYellowstone region, USA. Shading indicatesdepth–time variation in a total of 712
discrete samples: dark orange areas denotehigh species diversity, and gray areasdenote low species diversity. (AfterInterlandi & Kilham, 2001.)
r 2 = 0.996Simpson’s diversity index
n = 1441
123234
n = 100 n = 84 n = 23
Measured limiting resources
Figure 8.38 Phytoplankton diversity (Simpson’s index; mean ±
SE) associated with samples with different numbers of measured
limiting resources. It was possible to perform this analysis on 221 samples from those displayed in Figure 6.14. The number of samples ( n) in each limiting resource class is shown. (From
Interlandi & Kilham, 2001.)EIPC08  10/24/05  1:59 PM  Page 265••9.1 Introduction: the types of predators
Consumers affect the distribution and abundance of the things
they consume and vice versa, and these effects are of central impor-tance in ecology. Yet, it is never an easy task to determine whatthe effects are, how they vary and why they vary. These topicswill be dealt with in this and the next few chapters. We begin
here by asking ‘What is the nature of predation?’, ‘What are theeffects of predation on the predators themselves and on their prey?’and ‘What determines where predators feed and what they feedon?’ In Chapter 10, we turn to the consequences of predation forthe dynamics of predator and prey populations.
Predation, put simply, is consumption
of one organism (the prey) by anotherorganism (the predator), in which theprey is alive when the predator ﬁrst
attacks it. This excludes detritivory, the consumption of dead
organic matter, which is discussed in its own right in Chapter 11.Nevertheless, it is a deﬁnition that encompasses a wide varietyof interactions and a wide variety of ‘predators’.
There are two main ways in which
predators can be classiﬁed. Neither isperfect, but both can be useful. Themost obvious classiﬁcation is ‘taxo-nomic’: carnivores consume animals,herbivores consume plants and omni-
vores consume both (or, more correctly, prey from more thanone trophic level – plants and herbivores, or herbivores and carnivores). An alternative, however, is a ‘functional’ classiﬁcation
of the type already outlined in Chapter 3. Here, there are fourmain types of predator: true predators, grazers, parasitoids andparasites (the last is divisible further into microparasites and macro-
parasites as explained in Chapter 12).
True predators kill their prey more
or less immediately after attackingthem; during their lifetime they kill several or many different prey
individuals, often consuming prey in their entirety. Most of themore obvious carnivores like tigers, eagles, coccinellid beetles andcarnivorous plants are true predators, but so too are seed-eatingrodents and ants, plankton-consuming whales, and so on.
Grazers also attack large numbers of
prey during their lifetime, but they
remove only part of each prey individ-
ual rather than the whole. Their effect on a prey individual,although typically harmful, is rarely lethal in the short term, andcertainly never predictably lethal (in which case they would betrue predators). Amongst the more obvious examples are the largevertebrate herbivores like sheep and cattle, but the ﬂies that bitea succession of vertebrate prey, and leeches that suck theirblood, are also undoubtedly grazers by this deﬁnition.
Parasites, like grazers, consume parts
of their prey (their ‘host’), rather than
the whole, and are typically harmful butrarely lethal in the short term. Unlike grazers, however, their attacks are concentrated on one or a very few individuals duringtheir life. There is, therefore, an intimacy of association betweenparasites and their hosts that is not seen in true predators and grazers. Tapeworms, liver ﬂukes, the measles virus, the tuberculosisbacterium and the ﬂies and wasps that form mines and galls onplants are all obvious examples of parasites. There are also manyplants, fungi and microorganisms that are parasitic on plants(often called ‘plant pathogens’), including the tobacco mosaic virus, the rusts and smuts and the mistletoes. Moreover, manyherbivores may readily be thought of as parasites. For example,
aphids extract sap from one or a very few individual plants with which they enter into intimate contact. Even caterpillars oftenrely on a single plant for their development. Plant pathogens, and animals parasitic on animals, will be dealt with together inChapter 12. ‘Parasitic’ herbivores, like aphids and caterpillars, aredealt with here and in the next chapter, where we group them
deﬁnition of
predation
taxonomic andfunctionalclassiﬁcations of predators
true predatorsgrazers
parasites
Chapter 9
The Nature of Predation
EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 266THE NATURE OF PREDATION 267
together with true predators, grazers and parasitoids under the
umbrella term ‘predator’.
The parasitoids are a group of
insects that belong mainly to the orderHymenoptera, but also include many
Diptera. They are free-living as adults, but lay their eggs in, on
or near other insects (or, more rarely, in spiders or woodlice). Thelarval parasitoid then develops inside or on its host. Initially, itdoes little apparent harm, but eventually it almost totally consumesthe host and therefore kills it. An adult parasitoid emerges fromwhat is apparently a developing host. Often, just one parasitoiddevelops from each host, but in some cases several or many indi-viduals share a host. Thus, parasitoids are intimately associatedwith a single host individual (like parasites), they do not cause
immediate death of the host (like parasites and grazers), but theireventual lethality is inevitable (like predators). For parasitoids, andalso for the many herbivorous insects that feed as larvae onplants, the rate of ‘predation’ is determined very largely by therate at which the adult females lay eggs. Each egg is an ‘attack’on the prey or host, even though it is the larva that hatches fromthe egg that does the eating.
Parasitoids might seem to be an unusual group of limited 
general importance. However, it has been estimated that theyaccount for 10% or more of the world’s species (Godfray, 1994).This is not surprising given that there are so many species of insects,that most of these are attacked by at least one parasitoid, and thatparasitoids may in turn be attacked by parasitoids. A number of
parasitoid species have been intensively studied by ecologists, andthey have provided a wealth of information relevant to predationgenerally.
In the remainder of this chapter, we examine the nature of
predation. We will look at the effects of predation on the preyindividual (Section 9.2), the effects on the prey population as awhole (Section 9.3) and the effects on the predator itself (Section9.4). In the cases of attacks by true predators and parasitoids, theeffects on prey individuals are very straightforward: the prey iskilled. Attention will therefore be placed in Section 9.2 on preysubject to grazing and parasitic attack, and herbivory will be theprincipal focus. Apart from being important in its own right, her-bivory serves as a useful vehicle for discussing the subtleties andvariations in the effects that predators can have on their prey.
Later in the chapter we turn our attention to the behavior of
predators and discuss the factors that determine diet (Section 9.5)and where and when predators forage (Section 9.6). These topicsare of particular interest in two broad contexts. First, foraging is an aspect of animal behavior that is subject to the scrutiny ofevolutionary biologists, within the general ﬁeld of ‘behavioral ecology’. The aim, put simply, is to try to understand how naturalselection has favored particular patterns of behavior in particularcircumstances (how, behaviorally, organisms match their envir-onment). Second, the various aspects of predatory behavior canbe seen as components that combine to inﬂuence the populationdynamics of both the predator itself and its prey. The population
ecology of predation is dealt with much more fully in the nextchapter.
9.2 Herbivory and individual plants: tolerance
or defense
The effects of herbivory on a plant depend on which herbivoresare involved, which plant parts are affected, and the timing of attack relative to the plant’s development. In some insect–plantinteractions as much as 140 g, and in others as little as 3 g, of planttissue are required to produce 1 g of insect tissue (Gavloski & Lamb,
2000a) – clearly some herbivores will have a greater impact thanothers. Moreover, leaf biting, sap sucking, mining, ﬂower and fruitdamage and root pruning are all likely to differ in the effect theyhave on the plant. Furthermore, the consequences of defoliatinga germinating seedling are unlikely to be the same as those ofdefoliating a plant that is setting its own seed. Because the plantusually remains alive in the short term, the effects of herbivoryare also crucially dependent on the response of the plant. Plants may show tolerance of herbivore damage or resistance 
to attack.
9.2.1 Tolerance and plant compensation
Plant compensation is a term that
refers to the degree of tolerance exhib-ited by plants. If damaged plants havegreater ﬁtness than their undamagedcounterparts, they have overcompensated , and if they have lower
ﬁtness, they have undercompensated for herbivory (Strauss &
Agrawal, 1999). Individual plants can compensate for the effects
of herbivory in a variety of ways. In the ﬁrst place, the removalof shaded leaves (with their normal rates of respiration but lowrates of photosynthesis; see Chapter 3) may improve the balancebetween photosynthesis and respiration in the plant as a whole.Second, in the immediate aftermath of an attack from a herbi-vore, many plants compensate by utilizing reserves stored in avariety of tissues and organs or by altering the distribution of 
photosynthate within the plant. Herbivore damage may alsolead to an increase in the rate of photosynthesis per unit area ofsurviving leaf. Often, there is compensatory regrowth of defoli-ated plants when buds that would otherwise remain dormant arestimulated to develop. There is also, commonly, a reduced deathrate of surviving plant parts. Clearly, then, there are a numberof ways in which individual plants compensate for the effects ofherbivory (discussed further in Sections 9.2.3–9.2.5). But perfectcompensation is rare. Plants are usually harmed by herbivores even though the compensatory reactions tend to counteract theharmful effects.
••parasitoids
individual plants can
compensate forherbivore effectsEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 267268 CHAPTER 9
9.2.2 Defensive responses of plants
The evolutionary selection pressure
exerted by herbivores has led to a variety of plant physical and chemicaldefenses that resist attack (see Sections
3.7.3 and 3.7.4). These may be present and effective continuously
(constitutive defense) or increased production may be induced byattack (inducible defence) (Karban et al. , 1999). Thus, production of
the defensive hydroxamic acid is induced when aphids ( Rhopalo-
siphum padi ) attack the wild wheat Triticum uniaristatum (Gianoli
& Niemeyer, 1997), and the prickles of dewberries on cattle-grazedplants are longer and sharper than those on ungrazed plantsnearby (Abrahamson, 1975). Particular attention has been paid to rapidly inducible defenses, often the production of chemicalswithin the plant that inhibit the protease enzymes of the herbi-
vores. These changes can occur within individual leaves, withinbranches or throughout whole tree canopies, and they may bedetectable within a few hours, days or weeks, and last a few days,weeks or years; such responses have now been reported in morethan 100 plant–herbivore systems (Karban & Baldwin, 1997).
There are, however, a number of
problems in interpreting these responses(Schultz, 1988). First, are they ‘responses’
at all, or merely an incidental consequence of regrowth tissue having different properties from that removed by the herbivores? In fact, this issue is mainly one of semantics – if the metabolicresponses of a plant to tissue removal happen to be defensive, then natural selection will favor them and reinforce their use. A
further problem is much more substantial: are induced chemicalsactually defensive in the sense of having an ecologically signiﬁcanteffect on the herbivores that seem to have induced them? Finally,and of most signiﬁcance, are they truly defensive in the sense ofhaving a measurable, positive impact on the plant making them,especially after the costs of mounting the response have been takeninto account?
Fowler and Lawton (1985) ad-
dressed the second problem – ‘are theresponses harmful to the herbivores?’ – by reviewing the effects of rapidlyinducible plant defenses and found 
little clear-cut evidence that they are effective against insect herbivores, despite a widespread belief that they were. Forexample, they found that most laboratory studies revealed onlysmall adverse effects (less than 11%) on such characters as larvaldevelopment time and pupal weight, with many studies thatclaimed a larger effect being ﬂawed statistically, and they arguedthat such effects may have negligible consequences for ﬁeld populations. However, there are also a number of cases, manyof which have been published since Fowler and Lawton’sreview, in which the plant’s responses do seem to be genuinelyharmful to the herbivores. When larch trees were defoliated bythe larch budmoth, Zeiraphera diniana , the survival and adult
fecundity of the moths were reduced throughout the succeeding
4–5 years as a combined result of delayed leaf production, tougherleaves, higher ﬁber and resin concentration and lower nitrogenlevels (Baltensweiler et al. , 1977). Another common response to
leaf damage is early abscission (‘dropping off’) of mined leaves;in the case of the leaf-mining insect Phyllonorycter spp. on willow
trees ( Salix lasiolepis ), early abscission of mined leaves was an 
important mortality factor for the moths – that is, the herbivores
were harmed by the response (Preszler & Price, 1993). As a ﬁnal example, a few weeks of grazing on the brown seaweed
Ascophyllum nodosum by snails ( Littorina obtusata ) induces sub-
stantially increased concentrations of phlorotannins (Figure 9.1a),which reduce further snail grazing (Figure 9.1b). In this case, simple clipping of the plants did not have the same effect as the
herbivore. Indeed, grazing by another herbivore, the isopod Idotea
granulosa , also failed to induce the chemical defense. The snails can
stay and feed on the same plant for long time periods (the isopodsare much more mobile), so that induced responses that take timeto develop can still be effective in reducing damage by snails.
The ﬁnal question – ‘do plants
beneﬁt from their induced defensiveresponses?’ – has proved the most dif-ﬁcult to answer and only a few welldesigned ﬁeld studies have been performed (Karban et al. , 1999).
Agrawal (1998) estimated lifetime ﬁtness of wild radish plants(Raphanus sativus ) (as number of seeds produced multiplied by seed
mass) assigned to one of three treatments: grazed plants (subjectto grazing by the caterpillar of Pieris rapae ), leaf damage controls
(equivalent amount of biomass removed using scissors) and
overall controls (undamaged). Damage-induced responses, bothchemical and physical, included increased concentrations ofdefensive glucosinolates and increased densities of trichomes(hair-like structures). Earwigs ( Forﬁcula spp.) and other chewing
herbivores caused 100% more leaf damage on the control andartiﬁcially leaf-clipped plants than on grazed plants and there were30% more sucking green peach aphids ( Myzus persicae ) on the con-
trol and leaf-clipped plants (Figure 9.2a, b). Induction of resistance,caused by grazing by the P. rapae caterpillars, signiﬁcantly increased
the lifetime index of ﬁtness by more than 60% compared to thecontrol. However, leaf damage control plants (scissors) had 38%lower ﬁtness than the overall controls, indicating the negative effectof tissue loss without the beneﬁts of induction (Figure 9.2c).
This ﬁtness beneﬁt to wild radish occurred only in environ-
ments containing herbivores; in their absence, an induced defens-ive response was inappropriate and the plants suffered reducedﬁtness (Karban et al., 1999). A similar ﬁtness beneﬁt has been shown
in a ﬁeld experiment involving wild tobacco ( Nicotiana attenuata )
(Baldwin, 1998). A specialist consumer of wild tobacco, the catter-pillar of Manduca sexta , is remarkable in that it not only induces
an accumulation of secondary metabolites and proteinase inhibitorswhen it feeds on wild tobacco, but it also induces the plants to
•• ••plants make
defensive responses . . .
. . . or do they?
are herbivores really adverselyaffected? . . .. . . and do plantsreally beneﬁt?EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 268THE NATURE OF PREDATION 269
release volatile organic compounds that attract the generalist
predatory bug Geocoris pallens , which feeds on the slow moving
caterpillars (Kessler & Baldwin, 2004). Using molecular tech-niques, Zavala et al. (2004) were able to show that in the absence
of herbivory, plant genotypes that produced little or no proteinase
inhibitor grew faster and taller and produced more seed capsulesthan inhibitor-producing genotypes. Moreover, naturally occur-ring genotypes from Arizona that lacked the ability to produceproteinase inhibitors were damaged more, and sustained greaterManduca growth, in a laboratory experiment, compared with
Utah inhibitor-producing genotypes (Glawe et al. , 2003).It is clear from the wild radish and wild tobacco examples that
the evolution of inducible (plastic) responses involves signiﬁcantcosts to the plant. We may expect inducible responses to be favoredby selection only when past herbivory is a reliable predictor offuture risk of herbivory andif the likelihood of herbivory is not
constant (constant herbivory should select for a ﬁxed defensive
•• ••
Consumption (g; wet mass)
000.2
0.1
Ungrazed
control plants(b)
Previously
grazed plantsP = 0.02Phlorotannin content (% of dry mass)
Control008
6
4
2
Momentary
clipping
Continuous
clipping
Littorina
obtusata
Idotea
granulosa(a)
aaab
a
Figure 9.1 (a) Phlorotannin content of Ascophyllum nodosum
plants after exposure to simulated herbivory (removing tissue with
a hole punch) or grazing by real herbivores of two species. Meansand standard errors are shown. Only the snail Littorina obtusata
had the effect of inducing increased concentrations of the
defensive chemical in the seaweed. Different letters indicate thatmeans are signiﬁcantly different ( P<0.05). (b) In a subsequent
experiment, the snails were presented with algal shoots from the control and snail-grazed treatments in (a); the snails atesigniﬁcantly less of plants with a high phlorotannin content. (After Pavia & Toth 2000.)
Leaf area damaged (%)
Apr 6051015
Apr 20(a)Number of aphids per plant
Apr 601030
Apr 20(b)Plant fitness
(seeds × seed mass)
Treatment0123(c)2040Control
Damage
control
Induced
Sampling date
Figure 9.2 (a) Percentage of leaf area consumed by chewing
herbivores and (b) number of aphids per plant, measured on 
two dates (April 6 and April 20) in three ﬁeld treatments: overallcontrol, damage control (tissue removed by scissors) and induced(caused by grazing of caterpillars of Pieris rapae ). (c) The ﬁtness 
of plants in the three treatments calculated by multiplying the
number of seeds produced by the mean seed mass (in mg). (After Agrawal, 1998.)EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 269270 CHAPTER 9
phenotype that is best for that set of conditions) (Karban et al. ,
1999). Of course, it is not only the costs of inducible defenses that
can be set against ﬁtness beneﬁts. Constitutive defenses, such asspines, trichomes or defensive chemicals (particularly in the fam-ilies Solanaceae and Brassicaceae), also have costs that have been
measured (in phenotypes or genotypes lacking the defense) in termsof reductions in growth or the production of ﬂowers, fruits orseeds (see review by Strauss et al. , 2002).
9.2.3 Herbivory, defoliation and plant growth
Despite a plethora of defensive struc-
tures and chemicals, herbivores stilleat plants. Herbivory can stop plant
growth, it can have a negligible effect on growth rate, and it cando just about anything in between. Plant compensation may be
a general response to herbivory or may be speciﬁc to particularherbivores. Gavloski and Lamb (2000b) tested these alternativehypotheses by measuring the biomass of two cruciferous plantsBrassica napus and Sinapis alba in response to 0, 25 and 75% 
defoliation of seedling plants by three herbivore species with biting and chewing mouthparts – adult ﬂea beetles Phyllotreta 
cruciferae and larvae of the moths Plutella xylostella and Mamestra
conﬁgurata . Not surprisingly, both plant species compensated
better for 25% than 75% defoliation. However, although defoli-
ated to the same extent, both plants tended to compensate bestfor defoliation by the moth M. conﬁgurata and least for the beetle
P. cruciferae (Figure 9.3). Herbivore-speciﬁc compensation may
reﬂect plant responses to slightly different patterns of defoliationor different chemicals in saliva that suppress growth in contrastingways (Gavloski & Lamb, 2000b).
•• ••Compensation index
–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.00.5
B. napus : 25%
Compensation index
–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.00.5
B. napus : 75%*Compensation index
–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.00.5
S. alba : 25%7 14 21 28
Days after defoliation
Compensation index
–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.00.5
S. alba : 75%7 1 42 12 8
Days after defoliation
Phyllotreta cruciferae
Plutella xylostella
Mamestra configurata**
*
*
**
Figure 9.3 Compensation of leaf biomass
(mean ±SE: (logebiomass defoliated plant)
– (logeof mean for control plants)) of
Brassica napus and Sinapis alba seedlings
with 25 or 75% defoliation by three 
species of insect (see key) in a controlledenvironment. On the vertical axis, zero
equates to perfect compensation, negativevalues to undercompensation and positivevalues to overcompensation. Meanbiomasses of defoliated plants that differsigniﬁcantly from corresponding controlsare indicated by an asterisk. (After Gavloski& Lamb, 2000b.)timing of herbivory 
is crucialEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 270THE NATURE OF PREDATION 271
In the example above, compensation, which was generally 
complete by 21 days after defoliation, was associated with changes
in root biomass consistent with the maintenance of a constantshoot : root ratio. Many plants compensate for herbivory in thisway by altering the distribution of photosynthate in different parts
of the plant . Thus, for example, Kosola et al. (2002) found that
the concentration of soluble sugars in the young (white) ﬁne rootsof poplars ( Populus canadensis ) defoliated by gypsy moth caterpil-
lars ( Lymantria dispar ) was much lower than in undefoliated
trees. Older roots ( >1 month in age), on the other hand, showed
no signiﬁcant effect of defoliation.
Often, there is considerable difﬁculty in assessing the real
extent of defoliation, refoliation and hence net growth. Close 
monitoring of waterlily leaf beetles ( Pyrrhalta nymphaeae ) grazing
on waterlilies ( Nuphar luteum ) revealed that leaves were rapidly
removed, but that new leaves were also rapidly produced. More
than 90% of marked leaves on grazed plants had disappeared within17 days, while marked leaves on ungrazed plants were still com-pletely intact (Figure 9.4). However, simple counts of leaves ongrazed and ungrazed plants only indicated a 13% loss of leavesto the beetles, because of new leaf production on grazed plants.
The plants that seem most tolerant
of grazing, especially vertebrate grazing,are the grasses. In most species, themeristem is almost at ground levelamongst the basal leaf sheaths, and
this major point of growth (and regrowth) is therefore usually 
protected from grazers’ bites. Following defoliation, new leavesare produced using either stored carbohydrates or the photosyn-thate of surviving leaves, and new tillers are also often produced.Grasses do not beneﬁt directly from their grazers’ attentions.
But it is likely that they are helped by grazers in their competit-
ive interactions with other plants (which are more stronglyaffected by the grazers), accounting for the predominance ofgrasses in so many natural habitats that suffer intense vertebrategrazing. This is an example of the most widespread reason forherbivory having a more drastic effect on grazing-intolerantspecies than is initially apparent – the interaction between herbivory and plant competition (the range of possible con-sequences of which are discussed by Pacala & Crawley, 1992; 
see also Hendon & Briske, 2002). Note also that herbivores canhave severe nonconsumptive effects on plants when they act as vectors for plant pathogens (bacteria, fungi and especiallyviruses) – what the herbivores take from the plant is far less import-ant than what they give it! For instance, scolytid beetles feedingon the growing twigs of elm trees act as vectors for the fungusthat causes Dutch elm disease. This killed vast numbers of elmsin northeastern USA in the 1960s, and virtually eradicated themin southern England in the 1970s and early 1980s.
9.2.4 Herbivory and plant survival
Generally, it is more usual for herbivores
to increase a plant’s susceptibility tomortality than to kill it outright. Forexample, although the ﬂea beetleAltica sublicata reduced the growth rate of the sand-dune willow
Salix cordata in both 1990 and 1991 (Figure 9.5), signiﬁcant 
mortality as a result of drought stress only occurred in 1991. 
Then, however, susceptibility was strongly inﬂuenced by theherbivore: 80% of plants died in a high herbivory treatment(eight beetles per plant), 40% died at four beetles per plant, butnone of the beetle-free control plants died (Bach, 1994).
Repeated defoliation can have an
especially drastic effect. Thus, a singledefoliation of oak trees by the gypsy
moth ( Lymantria dispar ) led to only a 5%
mortality rate whereas three succes-sive heavy defoliations led to mortality rates of up to 80%(Stephens, 1971). The mortality of established plants, however,is not necessarily associated with massive amounts of defoliation.One of the most extreme cases where the removal of a smallamount of plant has a disproportionately profound effect is ring-barking of trees, for example by squirrels or porcupines. Thecambial tissues and the phloem are torn away from the woodyxylem, and the carbohydrate supply link between the leaves and the roots is broken. Thus, these pests of forestry plantationsoften kill young trees whilst removing very little tissue. Surface-feeding slugs can also do more damage to newly established 
grass populations than might be expected from the quantity ofmaterial they consume (Harper, 1977). The slugs chew through
•• ••Ungrazed Grazed
170180100
11
(Jul 26)4
(Aug 11)
Days since marking60
40
20Leaf area remaining (%)
Figure 9.4 The survivorship of leaves on waterlily plants grazed
by the waterlily leaf beetle was much lower than that on ungrazed
plants. Effectively, all leaves had disappeared at the end of 17 days,despite the fact that ‘snapshot’ estimates of loss rates to grazing ongrazed plants during this period suggested only around a 13% loss.
(After Wallace & O’Hop, 1985.)
grasses are
particularly tolerantof grazingmortality: the resultof an interaction withanother factor?
repeated defoliationor ring-barking can killEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 271272 CHAPTER 9
the young shoots at ground level, leaving the felled leaves
uneaten on the soil surface but consuming the meristematicregion at the base of shoots from which regrowth would occur.They therefore effectively destroy the plant.
Predation of seeds, not surprisingly, has a predictably 
harmful effect on individual plants (i.e. the seeds themselves).
Davidson et al. (1985) demonstrated dramatic impacts of seed-
eating ants and rodents on the composition of seed banks of ‘annual’plants in the deserts of southwestern USA and thus on the makeup of the plant community.
9.2.5 Herbivory and plant fecundity
The effects of herbivory on plant
fecundity are, to a considerable extent,
reﬂections of the effects on plantgrowth: smaller plants bear fewer seeds.However, even when growth appears
to be fully compensated, seed produc-
tion may nevertheless be reduced because of a shift of resourcesfrom reproductive output to shoots and roots. This was the case in the study shown in Figure 9.3 where compensation ingrowth was complete after 21 days but seed production was stillsigniﬁcantly lower in the herbivore-damaged plants. Moreover,indirectly through its effect on leaf area, or by directly feedingon reproductive structures, herbivory can affect ﬂoral traits(corolla diameter, ﬂoral tube length, ﬂower number) and have
an adverse impact on pollination and seed set (Mothershead &Marquis, 2000). Thus experimentally ‘grazed’ plants of Oenothera
macrocarpa produced 30% fewer ﬂowers and 33% fewer seeds.
Plants may also be affected more
directly, by the removal or destruction
of ﬂowers, ﬂower buds or seeds. Thus,caterpillars of the large blue butterﬂyMaculinea rebeli feed only in the ﬂowers
and on the fruits of the rare plantGentiana cruciata , and the number of seeds per fruit (70 compared
to 120) is reduced where this specialist herbivore occurs (Kery et al. , 2001). Many studies, involving the artiﬁcial exclusion or
removal of seed predators, have shown a strong inﬂuence of 
predispersal seed predation on recruitment and the density of attacked species. For example, seed predation was a signiﬁcantfactor in the pattern of increasing abundance of the shrubHaplopappus squarrosus along an elevational gradient from the
Californian coast, where predispersal seed predation was higher,to the mountains (Louda, 1982); and restriction of the cruciferCardamine cordifolia to shaded situations in the Rocky Mountains
was largely due to much higher levels of predispersal seed pre-
dation in unshaded locations (Louda & Rodman, 1996).
It is important to realize, however,
that many cases of ‘herbivory’ of reprod-uctive tissues are actually mutualistic,beneﬁtting both the herbivore and theplant (see Chapter 13). Animals that‘consume’ pollen and nectar usually transfer pollen inadvertentlyfrom plant to plant in the process; and there are many fruit-
eating animals that also confer a net beneﬁt on both the parent
•• ••No herbivory
Low herbivoryHigh herbivory
Clone number4 10.8
3 2Relative change in height0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
5 60.6
8 70.4
0.2
0.0
9(b)  Aug 10 – Aug 21 (a)  Jul 19 – Aug 17
Figure 9.5 Relative growth rates (changes in height, with standard errors) of a number of different clones of the sand-dune willow, 
Salix cordata , (a) in 1990 and (b) in 1991, subjected either to no herbivory, low herbivory (four ﬂea beetles per plant) or high herbivory
(eight beetles per plant). (After Bach, 1994.)
herbivores affect
plant growth . . .. . . indirectly byreducing seedproduction . . ....a n d  directly 
by removingreproductivestructures
much pollen andfruit herbivorybeneﬁts the plantEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 272THE NATURE OF PREDATION 273
plant and the individual seed within the fruit. Most vertebrate fruit-
eaters, in particular, either eat the fruit but discard the seed, oreat the fruit but expel the seed in the feces. This disperses the seed,rarely harms it and frequently enhances its ability to germinate.
Insects that attack fruit or developing fruit, on the other
hand, are very unlikely to have a beneﬁcial effect on the plant.
They do nothing to enhance dispersal, and they may even makethe fruit less palatable to vertebrates. However, some large ani-mals that normally kill seeds can also play a part in dispersing them,and they may therefore have at least a partially beneﬁcial effect.There are some ‘scatter-hoarding’ species, like certain squirrels,that take nuts and bury them at scattered locations; and there areother ‘seed-caching’ species, like some mice and voles, that collectscattered seeds into a number of hidden caches. In both cases,
although many seeds are eaten, the seeds are dispersed, they are
hidden from other seed predators and a number are never relocated by the hoarder or cacher (Crawley, 1983).
Herbivores also inﬂuence fecundity in a number of other
ways. One of the most common responses to herbivore attack isa delay in ﬂowering. For instance, in longer lived semelparousspecies, herbivory frequently delays ﬂowering for 1 year ormore, and this typically increases the longevity of such plants sincedeath almost invariably follows their single burst of reproduction
(see Chapter 4). Poa annua on a lawn can be made almost
immortal by mowing it at weekly intervals, whereas in naturalhabitats, where it is allowed to ﬂower, it is commonly an annual– as its name implies.
Generally, the timing of defoliation
is critical in determining the effect on
plant fecundity. If leaves are removedbefore inﬂorescences are formed, then the extent to whichfecundity is depressed clearly depends on the extent to which theplant is able to compensate. Early defoliation of a plant with sequen-tial leaf production may have a negligible effect on fecundity; but where defoliation takes place later, or where leaf productionis synchronous, ﬂowering may be reduced or even inhibited
completely. If leaves are removed after the inﬂorescence hasbeen formed, the effect is usually to increase seed abortion or toreduce the size of individual seeds.
An example where timing is important is provided by ﬁeld gen-
tians ( Gentianella campestris ). When herbivory on this biennial plant
is simulated by clipping to remove half its biomass (Figure 9.6a),the outcome depends on the timing of the clipping (Figure 9.6b).Fruit production was much increased over controls if clipping
•• ••Unclipped Clipped
Before clipping(a)
(b)
Jul 120
Control30Number of fruits25
20
15
10
5
Jul 20 Jul 28ab
c
dthe timing of
herbivory is critical
Figure 9.6 (a) Clipping of ﬁeld gentians
to simulate herbivory causes changes in 
the architecture and numbers of ﬂowersproduced. (b) Production of mature (openhistograms) and immature fruits (black
histograms) of unclipped control plants andplants clipped on different occasions fromJuly 12 to 28, 1992. Means and standarderrors are shown and all means aresigniﬁcantly different from each other (P<0.05). Plants clipped on July 12 and 
20 developed signiﬁcantly more fruits thanunclipped controls. Plants clipped on July28 developed signiﬁcantly fewer fruits than
controls. (After Lennartsson et al. , 1998).EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 273274 CHAPTER 9
occurred between 1 and 20 July, but if clipping occurred later than
this, fruit production was less in the clipped plants than in theunclipped controls. The period when the plants show compen-sation coincides with the time when damage by herbivores nor-mally occurs.
9.2.6 A postscript: antipredator chemical defenses 
in animals
It should not be imagined that antipred-ator chemical defenses are restricted toplants. A variety of constitutive animal
chemical defenses were described in Chapter 3 (see Section 3.7.4),including plant defensive chemicals sequestered by herbivores from
their food plants (see Section 3.7.4). Chemical defenses may be particularly important in modular animals, such as sponges,which lack the ability to escape from their predators. Despite theirhigh nutritional value and lack of physical defenses, most marinesponges appear to be little affected by predators (Kubanek et al. ,
2002). In recent years, several triterpene glycosides have beenextracted from sponges, including from Ectyoplasia ferox in the
Caribbean. In a ﬁeld study, crude extracts of reﬁned triterpeneglycosides from this sponge were presented in artiﬁcial food 
substrates to natural assemblages of reef ﬁshes in the Bahamas.Strong antipredatory affects were detected when compared to control substrates (Figure 9.7). It is of interest that the triterpeneglycosides also adversely affected competitors of the sponge, includ-ing ‘fouling’ organisms that overgrow them (bacteria, invertebratesand algae) and other sponges (an example of allelopathy – seeSection 8.3.2). All these enemies were apparently deterred by surface contact with the chemicals rather than by water-borneeffects (Kubanek et al. , 2002).9.3 The effect of predation on prey populations
Returning now to predators in general, it may seem that 
since the effects of predators are harmful to individual prey, theimmediate effect of predation on a population of prey must alsobe predictably harmful. However, these effects are not always sopredictable, for one or both of two important reasons. In the ﬁrst
place, the individuals that are killed (or harmed) are not alwaysa random sample of the population as a whole, and may be thosewith the lowest potential to contribute to the population’s future.Second, there may be compensatory changes in the growth, sur-vival or reproduction of the surviving prey: they may experiencereduced competition for a limiting resource, or produce more off-spring, or other predators may take fewer of the prey. In otherwords, whilst predation is bad for the prey that get eaten, it maybe good for those that do not. Moreover, predation is least likely
to affect prey dynamics if it occurs at a stage of the prey’s lifecycle that does not have a signiﬁcant effect, ultimately, on preyabundance.
To deal with the second point ﬁrst,
if, for example, plant recruitment isnot limited by the number of seedsproduced, then insects that reduceseed production are unlikely to have an important effect on plant abundance (Crawley, 1989). For instance, the weevilRhinocyllus conicus does not reduce recruitment of the nodding
thistle, Carduus nutans , in southern France despite inﬂicting 
seed losses of over 90%. Indeed, sowing 1000 thistle seeds per square meter also led to no observable increase in the number
of thistle rosettes. Hence, recruitment appears not to be limitedby the number of seeds produced; although whether it is limited by subsequent predation of seeds or early seedlings, orthe availability of germination sites, is not clear (Crawley, 1989).(However, we have seen in other situations (see Section 9.2.5)that predispersal seed predation can profoundly affect seed-ling recruitment, local population dynamics and variation in relative abundance along environmental gradients and acrossmicrohabitats.)
The impact of predation is often
limited by compensatory reactionsamongst the survivors as a result ofreduced intraspeciﬁc competition. Thus,in a classic experiment in which large numbers of woodpigeons(Columba palumbus ) were shot, the overall level of winter mor-
tality was not increased, and stopping the shooting led to noincrease in pigeon abundance (Murton et al. , 1974). This was
because the number of surviving pigeons was determined ultimatelynot by shooting but by food availability, and so when shooting
reduced density, there were compensatory reductions in intra-
speciﬁc competition and in natural mortality, as well as density-dependent immigration of birds moving in to take advantage ofunexploited food.
•• ••% eaten
0100
Control(a)
Treated80
60
40
20
0100
Control(b)
Treated80
60
40
20
Figure 9.7 Results of ﬁeld assays assessing antipredatory effects
of compounds from the sponge Ectyoplasia ferox against natural
assemblages of reef ﬁsh in the Bahamas. Means ( +SE) are shown
for percentages of artiﬁcial food substrates eaten in controls
(containing no sponge extracts) in comparison with: (a) substrates
containing a crude sponge extract ( t-test, P=0.036) and 
(b) substrates containing triterpene glycosides from the sponge (P=0.011). (After Kubanek et al. , 2002.)animals also defend
themselves
predation may occurat a demographicallyunimportant stage
compensatoryreactions amongstsurvivorsEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 274THE NATURE OF PREDATION 275
Indeed, whenever density is high
enough for intraspeciﬁc competition
to occur, the effects of predation on apopulation should be ameliorated by the
consequent reductions in intraspeciﬁc competition. Outcomes of
predation may, therefore, vary with relative food availability. Wherefood quantity or quality is higher, a given level of predation maynot lead to a compensatory response because prey are not food-limited. This hypothesis was tested by Oedekoven and Joern(2000) who monitored grasshopper ( Ageneotettix deorum ) sur-
vivorship in caged prairie plots subject to fertilization (or not) to increase food quality in the presence or absence of lycosid spiders ( Schizocoza spp.). With ambient food quality (no fertilizer,
black symbols), spider predation and food limitation were com-
pensatory: the same numbers of grasshoppers were recovered at the end of the 31-day experiment (Figure 9.8). However, withhigher food quality (nitrogen fertilizer added, colored symbols), spider predation reduced the numbers surviving compared to theno-spider control: a noncompensatory response. Under ambientconditions after spider predation, the surviving grasshoppersencountered more food per capita and lived longer as a result ofreduced competition. However, grasshoppers were less food-limited when food quality was higher so that after predation therelease of additional per capita food did not promote survivor-ship (Oedekoven & Joern, 2000).
Turning to the nonrandom distribu-
tion of predators’ attention within 
a population of prey, it is likely, forexample, that predation by many largecarnivores is focused on the old (and
inﬁrm), the young (and naive) or the sick. For instance, a studyin the Serengeti found that cheetahs and wild dogs killed a dispro-
portionate number from the younger age classes of Thomson’sgazelles (Figure 9.9a), because: (i) these young animals were easier to catch (Figure 9.9b); (ii) they had lower stamina and running speeds; (iii) they were less good at outmaneuvering 
the predators (Figure 9.9c); and (iv) they may even have failed to recognize the predators (FitzGibbon & Fanshawe, 1989;FitzGibbon, 1990). Yet these young gazelles will also have beenmaking no reproductive contribution to the population, and theeffects of this level of predation on the prey population willtherefore have been less than would otherwise have been the case.
Similar patterns may also be found in plant populations. The
mortality of mature Eucalyptus trees in Australia, resulting from
defoliation by the sawﬂy Paropsis atomaria , was restricted almost
entirely to weakened trees on poor sites, or to trees that had 
suffered from root damage or from altered drainage following cultivation (Carne, 1969).
Taken overall, then, it is clear that
the step from noting that individualprey are harmed by individual predatorsto demonstrating that prey adundanceis adversely affected is not an easy one to take. Of 28 studies inwhich herbivorous insects were experimentally excluded from plantcommunities using insecticides, 50% provided evidence of an effecton plants at the population level (Crawley, 1989). As Crawley noted,however, such proportions need to be treated cautiously. There isan almost inevitable tendency for ‘negative’ results (no popula-
tion effect) to go unreported, on the grounds of there being ‘nothing’ to report. Moreover, the exclusion studies often took 7 years or more to show any impact on the plants: it may be that many of the ‘negative’ studies were simply given up too early.
•• ••No spiders, no fertilizer
No spiders, fertilizer
Spiders, no fertilizer
Spiders, fertilizerLoge (number of grasshoppers)
20 15 500123
10
Time (days)25 30 35Figure 9.8 Trajectories of numbers 
of grasshoppers surviving (mean ±SE) 
for fertilizer and predation treatment
combinations in a ﬁeld experimentinvolving caged plots in the Arapaho
Prairie, Nebraska, USA. (After Oedekoven & Joern, 2000.)
effects ameliorated
by reducedcompetition
predatory attacks areoften directed at theweakest preydifﬁculties ofdemonstrating effectson prey populationsEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 275••276 CHAPTER 9
Many more recent investigations have shown clear effects of seed 
predation on plant abundance (e.g. Kelly & Dyer, 2002; Maronet al. , 2002).
9.4 Effects of consumption on consumers
The beneﬁcial effects that food has onindividual predators are not difﬁcult to imagine. Generally speaking, anincrease in the amount of food con-sumed leads to increased rates of
growth, development and birth, and decreased rates of mortal-
ity. This, after all, is implicit in any discussion of intraspeciﬁc competition amongst consumers (see Chapter 5): high densities,implying small amounts of food per individual, lead to lowgrowth rates, high death rates, and so on. Similarly, many of theeffects of migration previously considered (see Chapter 6) reﬂectthe responses of individual consumers to the distribution of foodavailability. However, there are a number of ways in which therelationships between consumption rate and consumer beneﬁt 
can be more complicated than they initially appear. In the ﬁrstplace, all animals require a certain amount of food simply for maintenance and unless this threshold is exceeded the animal will be unable to grow or reproduce, and will therefore beunable to contribute to future generations. In other words, lowconsumption rates, rather than leading to a small beneﬁt to theconsumer, simply alter the rate at which the consumer starvesto death.At the other extreme, the birth,
growth and survival rates of individual
consumers cannot be expected to riseindeﬁnitely as food availability is increased. Rather, the con-
sumers become satiated. Consumption rate eventually reaches aplateau, where it becomes independent of the amount of food avail-able, and beneﬁt to consumers therefore also reaches a plateau.Thus, there is a limit to the amount that a particular consumerpopulation can eat, a limit to the amount of harm that it can do to its prey population at that time, and a limit to the extentby which the consumer population can increase in size. This isdiscussed more fully in Section 10.4.
The most striking example of whole
populations of consumers being sati-
ated simultaneously is provided by the many plant species that have mastyears. These are occasional years in which there is synchronousproduction of a large volume of seed, often across a large geo-graphic area, with a dearth of seeds produced in the years inbetween (Herrera et al. , 1998; Koenig & Knops, 1998; Kelly et al. ,
2000). This is seen particularly often in tree species that suffer gen-
erally high intensities of seed predation (Silvertown, 1980) and itis therefore especially signiﬁcant that the chances of escaping seedpredation are likely to be much higher in mast years than in otheryears. Masting seems to be especially common in the NewZealand ﬂora (Kelly, 1994) where it has also been reported fortussock grass species (Figure 9.10). The individual predators of seedsare satiated in mast years, and the populations of predators can-not increase in abundance rapidly enough to exploit the glut. This
••Percentage
0
Fawns406080(a)
20
Half-growns AdolescentsSub-adultsAdultsKilled by cheetahs
Killed by wild dogs
Percentage in population
Percentage of chased
gazelles escaping
0
Fawns406080(b)
20
Half-growns Adolescents
Distance lost (m)
–1.5
Fawns0.01.02.0(c)
–1.0
Half-growns andadolescentsAdults–0.50.51.5
Figure 9.9 (a) The proportions of different age classes (determined by tooth wear) of Thomson’s gazelles in cheetah and wild dog kills is
quite different from their proportions in the population as a whole. (b) Age inﬂuences the probability for Thomson’s gazelles o f escaping
when chased by cheetahs. (c) When prey (Thomson’s gazelles) ‘zigzag’ to escape chasing cheetahs, prey age inﬂuences the mean di stance
lost by the cheetahs. (After FitzGibbon & Fanshawe, 1989; FitzGibbon, 1990.)
consumers often
need to exceed a threshold ofconsumptionconsumers maybecome satiated
mast years and thesatiation of seedpredatorsEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 276••THE NATURE OF PREDATION 277
is illustrated in Figure 9.11 where the percentage of ﬂorets of the
grass Chionochloa pallens attacked by insects remains below 20%
in mast years but ranges up to 80% or more in nonmast years.The fact that C. pallens and four other species of Chionochloa show
strong synchrony in masting is likely to result in an increased beneﬁt
to each species in terms of escaping seed predation in mast years.
On the other hand, the production of a mast crop makes great
demands on the internal resources of a plant. A spruce tree in amast year averages 38% less annual growth than in other years,and the annual ring increment in forest trees may be reduced byas much during a mast year as by a heavy attack of defoliatingcaterpillars. The years of seed famine are therefore essentially yearsof plant recovery.
As well as illustrating the potential
importance of predator satiation, the
example of masting highlights a furtherpoint relating to timescales. The seedpredators are unable to extract themaximum beneﬁt from (or do the maximum harm to) the mastcrop because their generation times are too long. A hypotheticalseed predator population that could pass through several gener-ations during a season would be able to increase exponentiallyand explosively on the mast crop and destroy it. Generally speak-ing, consumers with relatively short generation times tend to closelytrack ﬂuctuations in the quantity or abundance of their food or
••
Flowering intensity
(inflorescences tussock–1)
1995 198501975102030
198051525
1990C. rubra
C. seretofoliaC. rigidaFlowering intensity
(inflorescences tussock–1)
1995 198501975468
1980
Year19902C. crassiuscula
C. palliens
Mast years020
Nonmast years406080Insect predation
(% florets attacked)Figure 9.10 The ﬂowering rate for ﬁve
species of tussock grass ( Chionochloa )
between 1973 and 1996 in Fiordland
National Park, New Zealand. Mast yearsare highly synchronized in the ﬁve species,
seemingly in response to high temperaturesin the previous season, when ﬂowering isinduced. (After McKone et al. , 1998.)
Figure 9.11 Insect predation on ﬂorets of Chionochloa pallens
in mast ( n=3) and nonmast years ( n=7) from 1988 to 1997 at
Mount Hutt, New Zealand. A mast year is deﬁned here as one
with greater than 10 times as many ﬂorets produced per tussockthan in the previous year. The signiﬁcant difference in insectdamage supports the hypothesis that the function of masting is to satiate seed predators. (After McKone et al. , 1998.)a consumer’s
numerical response is limited by itsgeneration time . . .EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 277278 CHAPTER 9
prey, whereas consumers with relatively long generation times
take longer to respond to increases in prey abundance, andlonger to recover when reduced to low densities.
The same phenomenon occurs in
desert communities, where year-to-
year variations in precipitation can beboth considerable and unpredictable,
leading to similar year-to-year variation in the productivity of manydesert plants. In the rare years of high productivity, herbivoresare typically at low abundance following one or more years oflow plant productivity. Thus, the herbivores are likely to be sati-ated in such years, allowing plant populations to add consider-ably to their reserves, perhaps by augmenting their buried seedbanks or their underground storage organs (Ayal, 1994). The ex-
ample of fruit production by Asphodelus ramosus in the Negev desert
in Israel in shown in Figure 9.12. The mirid bug, Capsodes infus-
catus , feeds on Asphodelus , exhibiting a particular preference for
the developing ﬂowers and young fruits. Potentially, therefore,it can have a profoundly harmful effect on the plant’s fruit production. But it only passes through one generation per year.Hence, its abundance tends never to match that of its host plant(Figure 9.12). In 1988 and 1991, fruit production was high but mirid abundance was relatively low: the reproductive output of the mirids was therefore high (3.7 and 3.5 nymphs per adult,respectively), but the proportion of fruits damaged was relativelylow (0.78 and 0.66). In 1989 and 1992, on the other hand, whenfruit production had dropped to much lower levels, the propor-
tion of fruits damaged was much higher (0.98 and 0.87) and thereproductive output was lower (0.30 nymphs per adult in 1989;unknown in 1992). This suggests that herbivorous insects, at least,may have a limited ability to affect plant population dynamics in desert communities, but that the potential is much greater forthe dynamics of herbivorous insects to be affected by their foodplants (Ayal, 1994).Chapter 3 stressed that the quantity
of food consumed may be less import-
ant than its quality. In fact, food qual-ity, which has both positive aspects(like the concentrations of nutrients)and negative aspects (like the concentrations of toxins), can only
sensibly be deﬁned in terms of the effects of the food on the animal that eats it; and this is particularly pertinent in the case of herbivores. For instance, we saw in Figure 9.8 how even inthe presence of predatory spiders, enhanced food quality led toincreased survivorship of grasshoppers. Along similar lines,Sinclair (1975) examined the effects of grass quality (protein con-tent) on the survival of wildebeest in the Serengeti of Tanzania.Despite selecting protein-rich plant material (Figure 9.13a), thewildebeest consumed food in the dry season that contained well
below the level of protein necessary even for maintenance (5–6%of crude protein); and to judge by the depleted fat reserves of deadmales (Figure 9.13b), this was an important cause of mortality.Moreover, it is highly relevant that the protein requirements offemales during late pregnancy and lactation (December–May inthe wildebeest) are three to four times higher than the normal.It is therefore clear that the shortage of high-quality food (andnot just food shortage per se ) can have a drastic effect on the growth,
survival and fecundity of a consumer. In the case of herbivores
especially, it is possible for an animal to be apparently surroundedby its food whilst still experiencing a food shortage. We can seethe problem if we imagine that we ourselves are provided witha perfectly balanced diet – diluted in an enormous swimming pool.The pool contains everything we need, and we can see it therebefore us, but we may very well starve to death before we candrink enough water to extract enough nutrients to sustain our-selves. In a similar fashion, herbivores may frequently be confronted
with a pool of available nitrogen that is so dilute that they havedifﬁculty processing enough material to extract what they need.Outbreaks of herbivorous insects may then be associated with rareelevations in the concentration of available nitrogen in their foodplants (see Section 3.7.1), perhaps associated with unusually dryor, conversely, unusually waterlogged conditions (White, 1993).Consumers obviously need to acquire resources – but, to beneﬁtfrom them fully they need to acquire them in appropriate quant-ities and in an appropriate form. The behavioral strategies thathave evolved in the face of the pressures to do this are the maintopic of the next two sections.
9.5 Widths and compositions of diets
Consumers can be classiﬁed as either
monophagous (feeding on a singleprey type), oligophagous (few preytypes) or polyphagous (many preytypes). An equally useful distinction is
•• ••Number of individuals (1000s)
93 92 900872.12.83.5
91
Year1.4
0.7
88 89
Number of fruits (1000s)
030
20
10
Figure 9.12 Fluctuations in the fruit production of Asphodelus (/H17039)
and the number of Capsodes nymphs ( /H17033) and adults ( /H17009) at a study
site in the Negev desert, Israel. (After Ayal, 1994.)
. . . as illustrated by
desert interactionsfood quality ratherthan quantity can be of paramountimportance
range andclassiﬁcation of diet widthsEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 278THE NATURE OF PREDATION 279
between specialists (broadly, monophages and oligophages) and
generalists (polyphages). Herbivores, parasitoids and true preda-tors can all provide examples of monophagous, oligophagous andpolyphagous species. But the distribution of diet widths differsamongst the various types of consumer. True predators with spe-
cialized diets do exist (for instance the snail kite Rostrahamus socia-
bilisfeeds almost entirely on snails of the genus Pomacea ), but most
true predators have relatively broad diets. Parasitoids, on the otherhand, are typically specialized and may even be monophagous.Herbivores are well represented in all categories, but whilst grazing and ‘predatory’ herbivores typically have broad diets, ‘par-asitic’ herbivores are very often highly specialized. For instance,Janzen (1980) examined 110 species of beetle that feed as larvaeinside the seeds of dicotyledonous plants in Costa Rica (‘parasitizing’
them) and found that 83 attacked only one plant species, 14attacked only two, nine attacked three, two attacked four, oneattacked six and one attacked eight of the 975 plants in the area.
9.5.1 Food preferences
It must not be imagined that poly-
phagous and oligophagous species areindiscriminate in what they choosefrom their acceptable range. On the
contrary, some degree of preference is almost always apparent.
An animal is said to exhibit a preference for a particular type offood when the proportion of that type in the animal’s diet is higherthan its proportion in the animal’s environment. To measure food preference in nature, therefore, it is necessary not only to
examine the animal’s diet (usually by the analysis of gut contents)but also to assess the ‘availability’ of different food types. Ideally,this should be done not through the eyes of the observer (i.e. notby simply sampling the environment), but through the eyes ofthe animal itself.
A food preference can be expressed in two rather different con-
texts. There can be a preference for items that are the most valu-able amongst those available orfor items that provide an integral
part of a mixed and balanced diet. These will be referred to as
ranked and balanced preferences, respectively. In the terms ofChapter 3 (Section 3.8), where resources were classiﬁed, indi-viduals exhibit ranked preferences in discriminating between re-source types that are ‘perfectly substitutable’ and exhibit balancedpreferences between resource types that are ‘complementary’.
Ranked preferences are usually
seen most clearly amongst carnivores.For instance, Figure 9.14 shows two
examples in which carnivores activelyselected prey items that were the mostproﬁtable in terms of energy intakeper unit time spent dealing with (or‘handling’) prey. Results such as these reﬂect the fact that a car-nivore’s food often varies little in composition (see Section 3.7.1),but may vary in size or accessibility. This allows a single meas-ure (like ‘energy gained per unit handling time’) to be used to
characterize food items, and it therefore allows food items to beranked. In other words, Figure 9.14 shows consumers exhibitingan active preference for food of a high rank.
•• ••
Crude protein (%)
0N51020(a)
15
DJ FM AMJ J ASO
Bone marrow fat (%)
0N50100(b)
DJ A MJJASO
 FM
Figure 9.13 (a) The quality of food measured as percentage crude protein available to ( 7) and eaten by ( /H17033) wildebeest in the Serengeti
during 1971. Despite selection (‘eaten’ >‘available’), the quality of food eaten fell during the dry season below the level necessary for the
maintenance of nitrogen balance (5–6% of crude protein). (b) The fat content of the bone marrow of the live male population ( 7) and
those found dead from natural causes ( /H17033). Vertical lines, where present, show 95% conﬁdence limits. (After Sinclair, 1975.)
preference is deﬁned
by comparing dietwith ‘availability’ranked preferencespredominate whenfood items can beclassiﬁed on a singlescale . . .EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 279280 CHAPTER 9
For many consumers, however,
especially herbivores and omnivores,
no simple ranking is appropriate, sincenone of the available food itemsmatches the nutritional requirements 
of the consumer. These requirements
can therefore only be satisﬁed either by eating large quantities of food, and eliminating much of it in order to get a sufﬁcientquantity of the nutrient in most limited supply (for exampleaphids and scale insects excrete vast amounts of carbon in honeydew to get sufﬁcient nitrogen from plant sap), or by eatinga combination of food items that between them match the con-sumer’s requirements. In fact, many animals exhibit both sortsof response. They select food that is of generally high quality 
(so the proportion eliminated is minimized), but they also selectitems to meet speciﬁc requirements. For instance, sheep and cattle show a preference for high-quality food, selecting leaves in preference to stems, green matter in preference to dry or old material, and generally selecting material that is higher in nitrogen, phosphorus, sugars and gross energy, and lower inﬁber, than what is generally available. In fact, all generalist herbivores appear to show rankings in the rate at which they eatdifferent food plants when given a free choice in experimental tests(Crawley, 1983).
On the other hand, a balanced 
preference is also quite common. Forinstance, the plate limpet, Acmaea 
scutum , selects a diet of two species 
of encrusting microalgae that contains
60% of one species and 40% of the other, almost irrespective of
the proportions in which they are available (Kitting, 1980). Whilstcaribou, which survive on lichen through the winter, develop asodium deﬁciency by the spring that they overcome by drinking
seawater, eating urine-contaminated snow and gnawing shedantlers (Staaland et al. , 1980). We have only to look at ourselves
to see an example in which ‘performance’ is far better on amixed diet than on a pure diet of even the ‘best’ food.
There are two other important reasons why a mixed diet may
be favored. First, consumers may accept low-quality items sim-
ply because, having encountered them, they have more to gainby eating them (poor as they are) than by ignoring them and con-tinuing to search. This is discussed in detail in Section 9.5.3. Second,consumers may beneﬁt from a mixed diet because each food typemay contain a different undesirable toxic chemical. A mixed dietwould then keep the concentrations of all of these chemicals withinacceptable limits. It is certainly the case that toxins can play an
important role in food preference. For instance, dry matterintake by Australian ringtail possums ( Pseudocheirus peregrinus ) feed-
ing on Eucalyptus tree leaves was strongly negatively correlated
with the concentration of sideroxylonal, a toxin found inEucalyptus leaves, but was not related to nutritional character-
istics such as nitrogen or cellulose (Lawler et al. , 2000).
Overall, however, it would be quite wrong to give the
impression that all preferences have been clearly linked with oneexplanation or another. For example, Thompson (1988) reviewedthe relationship between the oviposition preferences of phy-tophagous insects and the performance of their offspring on theselected food plants in terms of growth, survival and reproduc-tion. A number of studies have shown a good association (i.e.
females preferentially oviposit on plants where their offspring perform best), but in many others the association is poor. In such cases there is generally no shortage of explanations for theapparently unsuitable behavior, but these explanations are, as yet,often just untested hypotheses.
•• ••Flies selected
Flies available
Energy gain (J s–1)
40 30 10002.04.06.0
20
Length of mussel (mm)(a)
Number of mussels
eaten per day5
04
321
7
Prey length (mm)(b)
Energy value
8Calories s–1 handling time
10 9 610
5121416
Frequency (%)
109 605103050
7
Prey length (mm)40
20
8Energy
Figure 9.14 Predators eating ‘proﬁtable’ prey, i.e. predators showing a preponderance in their diet for those prey items that provide them
with the most energy. (a) When crabs ( Carcinus maenas ) were presented with equal quantities of six size classes of mussels ( Mytilus edulis ),
they tended to show a preference for those providing the greatest energy gain (energy per unit handling time). (After Elner & H ughes,
1978.) (b) Pied wagtails ( Motacilla alba yarrellii ) tended to select, from scatophagid ﬂies available, those providing the greatest energy gain
per unit handling time. (After Davies, 1977; Krebs, 1978.)
. . . but many
consumers show a combination ofranked and balancedpreferences
mixed diets can befavored for a varietyof reasonsEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 280THE NATURE OF PREDATION 281
9.5.2 Switching
The preferences of many consumers
are ﬁxed; in other words, they aremaintained irrespective of the relativeavailabilities of alternative food types.But many others switch their preference,
such that food items are eaten disproportionately often when they
are common and are disproportionately ignored when they arerare. The two types of preference are contrasted in Figure 9.15.Figure 9.15a shows the ﬁxed preference exhibited by predatoryshore snails when they were presented with two species of mussel prey at a range of proportions. The line in Figure 9.15ahas been drawn on the assumption that they exhibited the samepreference at all proportions. This assumption is clearly justiﬁed:irrespective of availability, the predatory snails showed the same
marked preference for the thin-shelled, less protected Mytilus
edulis , which they could exploit more effectively. By contrast, Figure 9.15b shows what happened when guppies (ﬁsh) were
offered a choice between fruit-ﬂies and tubiﬁcid worms as prey.
The guppies clearly switched their preference, and consumed adisproportionate number of the more abundant prey type.
There are a number of situations in
which switching can arise. Probablythe most common is where different
types of prey are found in different
microhabitats, and the consumers concentrate on the mostproﬁtable microhabitat. This was the case for the guppies inFigure 9.15b: the fruit-ﬂies ﬂoated at the water surface whilst thetubiﬁcids were found at the bottom. Switching can also occur(Bergelson, 1985) in the following situations:
1When there is an increased probability of orientating toward
a common prey type, i.e. consumers develop a ‘search image’
for abundant food (Tinbergen, 1960) and concentrate on their‘image’ prey to the relative exclusion of nonimage prey.
•• ••
M. edulis eaten (%)
100 80 40004080100
60
M. edulis  offered (%)(a)
2060
20Expected if no
preference
Proportion of tubificids in diet
0.8 0.4000.40.81.0
0.6
Proportion of tubificids available(b)
0.20.6
0.2Expected if no
preferenceProportion of
Gammarus eaten
1.0001.0
Proportion of Gammarus  available(d)
0.5
0.5Number of guppies
1.00.8 0.40048
0.6
Proportion of tubificids in diet(c)
26
0.2
Figure 9.15 Switching. (a) A lack of switching: snails exhibit a consistent preference amongst the mussels Mytilus edulis and M. californianus , 
irrespective of their relative abundance (means plus standard errors). (After Murdoch & Stewart-Oaten, 1975.) (b) Switching by guppies fed
on tubiﬁcids and fruit-ﬂies: they take a disproportionate amount of whichever prey type is the more available (means and total ranges).
(After Murdoch et al. , 1975.) (c) Preferences shown by the individual guppies in (b) when offered equal amounts of the two prey types:
individuals were mostly specialists on one or other type. (d) Switching by sticklebacks fed mixtures of Gammarus and Artemia : overall they
take a disproportionate amount of whichever is more available. However, in the ﬁrst series of trials, with Gammarus availability decreasing
(closed symbols), ﬁrst-day trialists ( /H17039) tended to take more Gammarus than third-day trialists ( /H17033), whereas with Gammarus availability
increasing, ﬁrsts ( 4) tended to take less Gammarus than thirds ( 7). The effects of learning are apparent. (After Hughes & Croy, 1993.)
switching involves a
preference for foodtypes that arecommon
when mightswitching arise?EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 281282 CHAPTER 9
2When there is an increased probability of pursuing a common
prey type.
3When there is an increased probability of capturing a commonprey type.
4When there is an increased efﬁciency in handling a common
prey type.
In each case, increasingly common prey generate increased interest and/or success on the part of the predator, and hence anincreased rate of consumption. For instance, switching occurredin the 15-spined stickleback, Spinachia spinachia , feeding on the
crustaceans Gammarus and Artemia as alternative prey (Figure 9.15d)
as a result of learned improvements in capturing and handling
efﬁciencies, especially of Gammarus . Fish were fed Gammarus for
7 days, which was then replaced in the diet, in 10% steps, with Artemia
until the diet was 100% Artemia . This diet was then maintained
for a further 7 days, when the process was reversed back downto 100% Gammarus . Each ‘step’ itself lasted 3 days, on each of 
which the ﬁsh were tested. The learning process is apparent inFigure 9.15d in the tendency for ﬁrst-day trialists to be moreinﬂuenced than third-day trialists by the previous dietary mix.
Interestingly, switching in a population often seems to be a
consequence not of individual consumers gradually changingtheir preference, but of the proportion of specialists changing. Figure9.15c shows this for the guppies. When the prey types were equallyabundant, individual guppies were not generalists – rather, there
were approximately equal numbers of fruit-ﬂy and tubiﬁcid specialists.
It may come as a surprise that a
plant may show behavior akin toswitching. The northern pitcher plant
Sarracenia purpurea lives in nutrient-poor bogs and fens, circum-
stances that are thought to favor carnivory in plants. Carnivorousplants such as pitcher plants invest an excess of carbon (capturedin photosynthesis) in specialist organs for capturing invertebrateprey (effectively nitrogen-capturing structures). Figure 9.16 showshow relative size of the pitcher keel responded to nitrogen addi-tion to plots in Molly Bog in Vermont, USA. The more nitrogenthat was applied, the larger the relative keel size – this correspondsto an increase in size of the noncarnivorous keel of the pitcherand a decrease in size of the prey-catching tube. Thus, withincreasing nitrogen levels, the capacity for carnivory decreasedwhile maximum photosynthesis rates increased. In effect, the plantsswitched effort from nitrogen to carbon capture when morenitrogen was available in their environment.
9.5.3 The optimal foraging approach to diet width
Predators and prey have undoubtedly
inﬂuenced one another’s evolution.This can be seen in the distasteful or poisonous leaves of many plants, in the spines of hedgehogs and
in the camouﬂage coloration of many insect prey; and it can be
seen in the stout ovipositors of wood wasps, the multichamberedstomachs of cattle and the silent approach and sensory excellenceof owls. Such specialization makes it clear, though, that no predatorcan possibly be capable of consuming all types of prey. Simpledesign constraints prevent shrews from eating owls (even thoughshrews are carnivores) and prevent humming-birds from eatingseeds.
Even within their constraints, however, most animals con-
sume a narrower range of food types than they are morphologicallycapable of consuming. In trying to understand what determinesa consumer’s actual diet within its wide potential range, ecologistshave increasingly turned to optimal foraging theory . The aim of 
optimal foraging theory is to predict the foraging strategy to be
expected under speciﬁed conditions. It generally makes such pre-dictions on the basis of a number of assumptions:
1The foraging behavior that is
exhibited by present-day animals isthe one that has been favored by natural selection in the past butalso most enhances an animal’s ﬁtness at present.
2High ﬁtness is achieved by a high net rate of energy intake
(i.e. gross energy intake minus the energetic costs of obtain-ing that energy).
3Experimental animals are observed in an environment to whichtheir foraging behavior is suited, i.e. it is a natural environmentvery similar to that in which they evolved, or an experimentalarena similar in essential respects to the natural environment.
•• ••Applied N (mg l–1)
0.01
0.21
Relative keel size0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.90.1
a plant that ‘switches’
diet width and
evolutionFigure 9.16 The relationship between relative keel size of pitchers 
of Sarracenia purpurea and nitrogen added as aerial spray in plots 
at Molly Bog, Vermont. Dotted lines indicate 95% conﬁdence
intervals. A larger relative keel size corresponds to a reduced investment in organs of prey capture. (After Ellison & Gotelli, 2002.)
assumptions inherent
in optimal foragingtheoryEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 282THE NATURE OF PREDATION 283
These assumptions will not always be justiﬁed. First, other
aspects of an organism’s behavior may inﬂuence ﬁtness more thanoptimal foraging does. For example, there may be such a premiumon the avoidance of predators that animals forage at a place andtime where the risk from predators is lower, and in consequence
gather their food less efﬁciently than is theoretically possible (see Section 9.5.4). Second, and just as important, for many consumers (particularly herbivores and omnivores) the efﬁcientgathering of energy may be less critical than of some otherdietary constituent (e.g. nitrogen), or it may be of prime import-ance for the forager to consume a mixed and balanced diet. Insuch cases, the value of existing optimal foraging theory is limited. However, in circumstances where the energy maximiza-tion premise can be expected to apply, optimal foraging theory
offers a powerful insight into the signiﬁcance of the foraging ‘decisions’ that predators make (for reviews see Stephens & Krebs,1986; Krebs & Kacelnik, 1991; Sih & Christensen, 2001).
Typically, optimal foraging theory
makes predictions about foraging beha-vior based on mathematical modelsconstructed by ecological theoreticianswho are omniscient (‘all knowing’) asfar as their model systems are con-
cerned. The question therefore arises: is it necessary for a real forager to be equally omniscient and mathematical, if it is to adopt the appropriate, optimal strategy? The answer is ‘no’. Thetheory simply says that if there is a forager that in some way (in
any way) manages to do the right thing in the right circumstances,then this forager will be favored by natural selection; and if itsabilities are inherited, these should spread, in evolutionary time,throughout the population.
Optimal foraging theory does not specify precisely how the
forager should make the right decisions, and it does not requirethe forager to carry out the same calculations as the modeler. Laterwe consider another group of ‘mechanistic’ models (see Sec-tion 9.6.2) that attempt to show how a forager, given that it isnot omniscient, might nevertheless manage to respond by ‘rules of thumb’ to limited environmental information and therebyexhibit a strategy that is favored by natural selection. But it is optimal foraging theory that predicts the nature of the strategythat should be so favored.
The ﬁrst paper on optimal foraging theory (MacArthur &
Pianka, 1966) sought to understand the determination of diet ‘width’(the range of food types eaten by an animal) within a habitat.Subsequently, the model was developed into a more rigorous algebraic form, notably by Charnov (1976a). MacArthur andPianka argued that to obtain food, any predator must expend timeand energy, ﬁrst in searching for its prey and then in handling it (i.e. pursuing, subduing and consuming it). Whilst searching,a predator is likely to encounter a wide variety of food items.MacArthur and Pianka therefore saw diet width as depending onthe responses of predators once they had encountered prey.Generalists pursue (and may then subdue and consume) a large
proportion of the prey types they encounter; specialists continuesearching except when they encounter prey of their speciﬁcallypreferred type.
The ‘problem’ for any forager is
this: if it is a specialist, then it will only
pursue proﬁtable prey items, but itmay expend a great deal of time and energy searching for them.Whereas if it is a generalist, it will spend relatively little time search-ing, but it will pursue both more and less proﬁtable types of prey.An optimal forager should balance the pros and cons so as to max-imize its overall rate of energy intake. MacArthur and Piankaexpressed the problem as follows: given that a predator alreadyincludes a certain number of proﬁtable items in its diet, should
it expand its diet (and thereby decrease its search time) by includ-ing the next most proﬁtable item as well?
We can refer to this ‘next most proﬁtable’ item as the ith item.
E
i/hiis then the proﬁtability of the item, where Eiis its energy
content, and hiits handling time. In addition, K/Mis the average
proﬁtability of the ‘present’ diet (i.e. one that includes all prey
types that are more proﬁtable than i, but does not include prey
type iitself ), and Ois the average search time for the present diet.
If a predator does pursue a prey item of type i, then its expected
rate of energy intake is Ei/hi. But if it ignores this prey item, whilst
pursuing all those that are more proﬁtable, then it can expect tosearch for a further O, following which its expected rate of energy
intake is K/M. The total time spent in this latter case is O+M, and
so the overall expected rate of energy intake is K/(O+M). The most
proﬁtable, optimal strategy for a predator will be to pursue the
ith item if, and only if:
E
i/hi≥K/(O+M). (9.1)
In other words, a predator should continue to add increasingly
less proﬁtable items to its diet as long as Equation 9.1 is satisﬁed
(i.e. as long as this increases its overall rate of energy intake). This will serve to maximize its overall rate of energy intake, K/(O+M).
This optimal diet model leads to a number of predictions.
1Predators with handling times thatare typically short compared totheir search times should be gener-alists, because in the short time it takes them to handle a prey
item that has already been found, they can barely begin to searchfor another prey item. (In terms of Equation 9.1: E
i/hiis large
(hiis small) for a wide range of prey types, whereas K/(O+M)
is small ( Ois large) even for broad diets.) This prediction
seems to be supported by the broad diets of many insectivo-
rous birds feeding in trees and shrubs. Searching is always moderately time consuming, but handling the minute insects
takes negligible time and is almost always successful. A bird,
•• ••theoreticians are
omniscientmathematicians – theforagers need not beto pursue or notpursue?
searchers should begeneralistsEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 283284 CHAPTER 9
therefore, has something to gain and virtually nothing to lose
by consuming an item once found, and overall proﬁtability ismaximized by a broad diet.
2By contrast, predators with hand-ling times that are long relative 
to their search times should be spe-cialists. That is, if Ois always small,
then K/(O+M) is similar to K/M. Thus, maximizing K/(O+M) is
much the same as maximizing K/h, which is achieved, clearly,
by including only the most proﬁtable items in the diet. Forinstance, lions live more or less constantly in sight of their preyso that search time is negligible; handling time, on the otherhand, and particularly pursuit time, can be long (and very energyconsuming). Lions consequently specialize on prey that can
be pursued most proﬁtably: the immature, the lame and the old.
3Other things being equal, a predatorshould have a broader diet in anunproductive environment (whereprey items are relatively rare and Ois relatively large) than in a pro-
ductive environment (where Ois
smaller). This prediction is broadly supported by the twoexamples shown in Figure 9.17: in experimental arenas, bothbluegill sunﬁsh ( Lepomis macrochirus ) and great tits ( Parus
major ) had more specialized diets when prey density was
higher. A related result has been reported from predators in
their natural setting – brown and black bears ( Ursos arctos andU. americanus ) feeding on salmon in Bristol Bay in Alaska. When
salmon availability was high, bears consumed less biomass per
captured ﬁsh, targeting energy-rich ﬁsh (those that had notspawned) or energy-rich body parts (eggs in females, brain inmales). In essence their diet became more specialized when
prey were abundant (Gende et al. , 2001).
4Equation 9.1 depends on the pro-ﬁtability of the ith item ( E
i/hi),
depends on the proﬁtabilities of the
items already in the diet ( K/M) and
depends on the search times foritems already in the diet ( O) and thus on their abundance. But
it does not depend on the search time for the ith item, s
i. In
other words, predators should ignore insufﬁciently proﬁtablefood types irrespective of their abundance. Re-examining theexamples in Figure 9.17, we can see that these both refer tocases in which the optimal diet model does indeed predict that
the least proﬁtable items should be ignored completely. Theforaging behavior was very similar to this prediction, but inboth cases the animals consistently took slightly more thanexpected of the less proﬁtable food types. In fact, this sort ofdiscrepancy has been uncovered repeatedly, and there are anumber of reasons why it may occur, which can be summar-ized crudely by noting that the animals are not omniscient.The optimal diet model, however, does not predict a perfectcorrespondence between observation and expectation. It 
predicts the sort of strategy that will be favored by natural selection, and says that the animals that come closest to this
•• ••handlers should be
specialists
specialization shouldbe greater inproductiveenvironmentsthe abundance ofunproﬁtable preytypes is irrelevant
Prediction of
optimal diettheory(a)  Bluegill sunfish
Ratio
encountered
Observed
ratio in diet0.8 0 0.4Low density
0.8 0 0.4Medium density
0.8 0 0.4High density
SML
SMLSmall preyMedium preyLarge prey
Predicted
proportionin diet(b)  Great tit
Proportion
encountered
Observed
proportionin diet0.8 0 0.4Low density
SL
SLSmall preyLarge prey0.8 0 0.4High density I
0.8 0 0.4High density II
0.8 0 0.4High density IIIFigure 9.17 Two studies of optimal 
diet choice that show a clear but limited
correspondence with the predictions ofCharnov’s (1976a) optimal diet model.Diets are more specialized at high prey
densities; but more low proﬁtability itemsare included than predicted by the theory.(a) Bluegill sunﬁsh preying on different sizeclasses of Daphnia : the histograms show
ratios of encounter rates with each sizeclass at three different densities, togetherwith the predicted and observed ratios inthe diet. (After Werner & Hall, 1974.) (b) Great tits preying on large and small
pieces of mealworm. (After Krebs et al. ,
1977.) The histograms in this case refer to the proportions of the two types of item taken. (After Krebs, 1978.)EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 284THE NATURE OF PREDATION 285
strategy will be most favored. From this point of view, the cor-
respondence between data and theory in Figure 9.17 seemsmuch more satisfactory. Sih and Christensen (2001) reviewed134 studies of optimal diet theory, focusing on the questionof what factors might explain the ability of the theory to 
correctly predict diets. Contrary to their a priori prediction, 
forager groups (invertebrate versus ectothermic vertebrateversus endothermic vertebrate) did not differ in the likelihoodof corroborating the theory. Their major conclusion was thatwhile optimal diet theory generally works well for foragers thatfeed on immobile or relatively immobile prey (leaves, seeds,mealworms, zooplankton relative to ﬁsh), it often fails to pre-dict diets of foragers that attack mobile prey (small mammals,ﬁsh, zooplankton relative to insect predators). This may 
be because variations among mobile prey in vulnerability(encounter rate and capture success) are often more import-ant in determining predator diets than are variations in the activechoices of predators (Sih & Christensen, 2001).
5Equation 9.1 also provides a context for understanding the narrow specialization of predators that live in intimate asso-ciation with their prey, especially where an individual pre-dator is linked to an individual prey (e.g. many parasitoids andparasitic herbivores – and many parasites (see Chapter 12)).Since their whole lifestyle and life cycle are ﬁnely tuned to thoseof their prey (or host), handling time ( M) is low; but this pre-
cludes their being ﬁnely tuned to other prey species, forwhich, therefore, handling time is very high. Equation 9.1 will
thus only apply within the specialist group, but not to any fooditem outside it.
On the other hand, polyphagy has deﬁnite advantages. Search costs(O) are typically low – food is easy to ﬁnd – and an individual is
unlikely to starve because of ﬂuctuations in the abundance of onetype of food. In addition, polyphagous consumers can, of course,construct a balanced diet, and maintain this balance by varyingpreferences to suit altered circumstances, and can avoid consuminglarge quantities of a toxin produced by one of its food types. Theseare considerations ignored by Equation 9.1.
Overall, then, evolution may
broaden or restrict diets. Where preyexert evolutionary pressures demandingspecialized morphological or physio-logical responses from the consumer,
restriction is often taken to extremes. But where consumers feedon items that are individually inaccessible or unpredictable or lacking in certain nutrients, the diet often remains broad. An appeal-ing and much-discussed idea is that particular pairs of predatorand prey species have not only evolved but have coevolved. In other words, there has been an evolutionary ‘arms race’,whereby each improvement in predatory ability has been followedby an improvement in the prey’s ability to avoid or resist the 
predator, which has been followed by a further improvement in predatory ability, and so on. This may itself be accompanied, 
on a long-term, evolutionary timescale, by speciation, so that, forexample, related species of butterﬂy are associated with relatedspecies of plants – all the species of the Heliconiini feed on mem-bers of the Passiﬂoracaea (Ehrlich & Raven, 1964; Futuyma & May,
1992). To the extent that coevolution occurs, it may certainly be an additional force in favor of diet restriction. At present, however, hard evidence for predator–prey or plant–herbivorecoevolution is proving difﬁcult to come by (Futuyma & Slatkin,1983; Futuyma & May, 1992).
There may seem, at ﬁrst sight, to be a contradiction between
the predictions of the optimal diet model and switching. In thelatter, a consumer switches from one prey type to another as theirrelative densities change. But the optimal diet model suggests that
the more proﬁtable prey type should always be taken, irrespect-ive of its density or the density of any alternative. Switching ispresumed to occur, however, in circumstances to which theoptimal diet model does not strictly apply. Speciﬁcally, switchingoften occurs when the different prey types occupy differentmicrohabitats, whereas the optimal diet model predicts behaviorwithin a microhabitat. Moreover, most other cases of switchinginvolve a change in the proﬁtabilities of items of prey as their dens-ity changes, whereas in the optimal diet model these are constants.Indeed, in cases of switching, the more abundant prey type is themore proﬁtable, and in such a case the optimal diet model predictsspecialization on whichever prey type is more proﬁtable (that is,whichever is more abundant; in other words, switching).
9.5.4 Foraging in a broader context
It is worth stressing that foraging strat-
egies will not always be strategies forsimply maximizing feeding efﬁciency.On the contrary, natural selection willfavor foragers that maximize their net
beneﬁts, and strategies will thereforeoften be modiﬁed by other, conﬂicting demands on the indi-viduals concerned. In particular, the need to avoid predators will frequently affect an animal’s foraging behavior.
This has been shown in work on foraging by nymphs of 
an aquatic insect predator, the backswimmer Notonecta hoffmanni
(Sih, 1982). These animals pass through ﬁve nymphal instars(with I being the smallest and youngest, and V the oldest), andin the laboratory the ﬁrst three instars are liable to be preyed 
upon by adults of the same species, such that the relative risk ofpredation from adults was:
I>II>III>IV=V≅no risk.
These risks appear to modify the behavior of the nymphs, in thatthey tend (both in the laboratory and in the ﬁeld) to avoid the
•• ••coevolution:
predator–prey armsraces?backswimmers foragesuboptimally butavoid being preyedo n...EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 285286 CHAPTER 9
central areas of water bodies, where the concentration of adults
is greatest. In fact, the relative degree of avoidance was the sameas the relative risk of predation from adults:
I>II>III>IV=V ≅no avoidance.
Yet these central areas also contain the greatest concentration 
of prey items for the nymphs, and so, by avoiding predators,nymphs of instars I and II showed a reduction in feeding rate in the presence of adults (although those of instar III did not). The young nymphs displayed a less than maximal feeding rate as a result of their avoidance of predation, but an increased survivorship.
The modifying inﬂuence of predators
on foraging behavior has also been
studied by Werner et al. (1983b) work-
ing on bluegill sunﬁsh. They estimated the net energy returns fromforaging in three contrasting laboratory habitats – in open water,amongst water weeds and on bare sediment – and they exam-ined how prey densities varied in comparable natural habitats ina lake through the seasons. They were then able to predict thetime at which the sunﬁsh should switch between different lakehabitats so as to maximize their overall net energy returns. In theabsence of predators, three sizes of sunﬁsh behaved as predicted
(Figure 9.18). But in a further ﬁeld experiment, this time in thepresence of predatory largemouth bass, the small sunﬁsh restrictedtheir foraging to the water weed habitat (Figure 9.19) (Werner et al. , 1983a). Here, they were relatively safe from predation,
although they could only achieve a markedly submaximal rate of
energy intake. By contrast, the larger sunﬁsh are more or less safefrom predation by bass, and they continued to forage accordingto the optimal foraging predictions. In a similar vein, the nymphsof several species of algivorous mayﬂies largely restrict theirfeeding to the hours of darkness in streams that contain browntrout, reducing their overall feeding rates but also reducing therisk of predation (Townsend, 2003). In the case of mammals thatfeed at night, including mice, porcupines and hares, time spent
feeding may be reduced in bright moonlight when predation riskis highest (Kie, 1999).
A foraging strategy is an integral
part of an animal’s overall pattern ofbehavior. The strategy is stronglyinﬂuenced by the selective pressures favoring the maximizationof feeding efﬁciency, but it may also be inﬂuenced by other, pos-sibly conﬂicting demands. It is also worth pointing out one otherthing. The places where animals occur, where they are maximally
•• ••Predicted net
energy gain (J s–1)(a)Percentage of
total diet
15
Jul0.20.8
0.6
0.4
0.20.8
0.6
0.4Small Medium Large
31 15 31 15 30
Aug Sep(b)
1000.20.8
0.6
0.4
80
604020
15
Jul
31 15 31 15 30
Aug Sep100
80604020
15
Jul
31 15 31 15 30
Aug Sep100
80604020Open water
SedimentsVegetation
Figure 9.18 Seasonal patterns in (a) the predicted habitat proﬁtabilities (net rate of energy gain) and (b) the actual percentage of the 
diet originating from each habitat, for three size classes of bluegill sunﬁsh ( Lepomis macrochirus ). Piscivores were absent. (The ‘vegetation’
habitat is omitted from (b) for the sake of clarity – only 8–13% of the diet originated from this habitat for all size classes of ﬁsh.) There is
good correspondence between the patterns in (a) and (b). (After Werner et al. , 1983b.)
. . . as do certain ﬁsh
predation and 
the realized nicheEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 286THE NATURE OF PREDATION 287
abundant and where they choose to feed are all key components
of their ‘realized niches’. We saw in Chapter 8 that realizedniches can be highly constrained by competitors. Here, we seethat they can also be highly constrained by predators. This is also seen in the effects of predation by the barn owl ( Tyto alba )
on the foraging behavior of three heteromyid rodents, the
Arizona pocket mouse ( Perognathus amplus ), Bailey’s pocket mouse
(P. baileyi ) and Merriam’s kangaroo rat ( Dipodomys merriami )
(Brown et al. , 1988). In the presence of owls, all three species 
moved to microhabitats where they were less at risk from owlpredation and where they reduced their foraging activity.However they did so to varying extents, such that the way in which the microhabitat was partitioned between them was quitedifferent in the presence and absence of owls.
9.6 Foraging in a patchy environment
For all consumers, food is distributed
patchily. The patches may be naturaland discrete physical objects: a bushladen with berries is a patch for a fruit-eating bird; a leaf covered
with aphids is a patch for a predatory ladybird. Alternatively, a‘patch’ may only exist as an arbitrarily deﬁned area in an appar-ently uniform environment; for a wading bird feeding on a sandybeach, different 10 m
2areas may be thought of as patches that
contain different densities of worms. In all cases though, a patch
must be deﬁned with a particular consumer in mind. One leaf isan appropriate patch for a ladybird, but for a larger and more activeinsectivorous bird, 1 m
2of canopy or even a whole tree may 
represent a more appropriate patch.
Ecologists have been particularly interested in patch preferences
of consumers where patches vary in the density of food or preyitems they contain. There are many examples where predators
show an ‘aggregative response’, spending more time in patchescontaining high densities (because these are the most proﬁtablepatches) (Figure 9.20a–d), although such direct density dependenceis not always the case (Figure 9.20e). We deal with aggregativeresponses in more detail in Chapter 10 where their importancein population dynamics will be our focus, and particularly theirpotential to lend stability to predator–prey dynamics. For now,we concentrate on the behavior that leads to predator aggrega-tion (Section 9.6.1), the optimal foraging approach to patch use
(Section 9.6.2) and the distribution patterns that are likely to resultwhen the opposing tendencies of predators to aggregate and tointerfere with each other’s foraging are both taken into account(Section 9.6.3).
9.6.1 Behavior that leads to aggregated distributions
There are various types of behavior
underlying the aggregative responsesof consumers, but they fall into two broad categories: thoseinvolved with the location of proﬁtable patches, and theresponses of consumers once within a patch. The ﬁrst category
includes all examples in which consumers perceive, at a distance,the existence of heterogeneity in the distribution of their prey.
Within the second category –
responses of consumers within patches– there are two main aspects of behav-ior. The ﬁrst is a change in the consumer’s pattern of searchingafter encountering items of food. In particular, there is often aslowing down of movement and an increased rate of turning imme-diately following the intake of food, both of which lead to the
consumer remaining in the vicinity of its last food item (‘area-restricted search’). Alternatively, or in addition, consumers maysimply abandon unproﬁtable patches more rapidly than theyabandon proﬁtable ones. Both types of behavior were evident whenthe carnivorous, net-spinning larva of the caddis-ﬂy Plectrocnemia
conspersa feeds on chironomid (midge) larvae in a laboratory
stream. Caddis in their nets were provided with one prey itemat the beginning of the experiment and then fed daily rations of
•• ••
Number of fish25(a)      Predator present
20
15
10
5
100 60 20 0 40
Percentage vegetation where sunfish
prey are taken from80Number of fish
050(b)      No predator present
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Figure 9.19 (a) In contrast to Figure 9.18 and to (b), when
largemouth bass (which prey on small bluegill sunﬁsh) are 
present many sunﬁsh take prey from areas where the percentagevegetation is high and where they are relatively protected frompredation. (After Werner et al. , 1983a.)
food is patchily
distributedlocating a patch
area-restricted searchEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 287•• ••288 CHAPTER 9
30 1000103040
20
Aphids per leaf(a)
20Searching time
per leaf (min)
40000010
2000
Number of Corophium  (m–2)(b)
5Number of redshank (ha–1)Parasitism (%)
25 15 50
0204050
10
Host density per patch(c)
1030
20 1000 600 20000204060
400
Host density per patch(d)
1030
80050
800 600 200002060100
400
Host density per patch(e)
4080
zero, one or three prey. The tendency to abandon the net was
lowest at the higher feeding rates (Townsend & Hildrew, 1980).Plectrocnemia ’s behavior in relation to prey patches also has 
an element of area-restricted search: the likelihood that it will spin a net in the ﬁrst place depends on whether it happens to
encounter a food item (which it can consume even without a net) (Figure 9.21a). Overall, therefore, a net is more likely to beconstructed, and less likely to be abandoned, in a rich patch. These two behaviors account for a directly density-dependentaggregative response in the natural stream environment observedfor much of the year (Figure 9.21b).
The difference in the rates of aban-
donment of patches of high and lowproﬁtability can be achieved in a num-
ber of ways, but two are especially
easy to envisage. A consumer might leave a patch when its feed-ing rate drops below a threshold level, or a consumer might havea giving-up time – it might abandon a patch whenever a particu-lar time interval passes without the successful capture of food.Whichever mechanism is used, or indeed if the consumer simplyuses area-restricted search, the consequences will be the same: individuals will spend longer in more proﬁtable patches, and
these patches will therefore generally contain more consumers.
9.6.2 Optimal foraging approach to patch use
The advantages to a consumer of spending more time in higherproﬁtability patches are easy to see. However, the detailed alloca-tion of time to different patches is a subtle problem, since it depends on the precise differentials in proﬁtability, the averageproﬁtability of the environment as a whole, the distance between
the patches, and so on. The problem has been a particular focusof attention for optimal foraging theory. In particular, a great dealof interest has been directed at the very common situation in whichforagers themselves deplete the resources of a patch, causing itsproﬁtability to decline with time. Amongst the many examplesof this are insectivorous insects removing prey from a leaf, andbees consuming nectar from a ﬂower.
Charnov (1976b) and Parker and Stuart (1976) produced 
similar models to predict the behavior of an optimal forager in
such situations. They found that the optimal stay-time in a patchFigure 9.20 Aggregative responses: (a) coccinellid larvae ( Coccinella septempunctata ) spend more time on leaves with high densities of 
their aphid prey ( Brevicoryne brassicae ) (after Hassell & May, 1974); (b) redshank ( Tringa totanus ) aggregate in patches with higher densities
of their amphipod prey ( Corophium volutator ) (after Goss-Custard, 1970); (c) direct density dependence when the parasitoid Delia radicum
attacks Trybliographa rapae ; and (d) direct density dependence when the parasitoid Aspidiotiphagus citrinus attacks Fiorinia externa . (e) But
direct density dependence is not always the case: inverse density dependence when the parasitoid Ooencyrtus kuwanai attacks Lymantria
dispar . ((c–e) after Pacala & Hassall, 1991.)
thresholds and
giving-up timesEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 288••THE NATURE OF PREDATION 289
should be deﬁned in terms of the rate of energy extraction 
experienced by the forager at the moment it leaves a patch (the ‘marginal value’ of the patch). Charnov called the results the‘marginal value theorem’. The models were formulated mathe-matically, but their salient features are shown in graphic form in
Figure 9.22.
The primary assumption of the model is that an optimal 
forager will maximize its overall intake of a resource (usuallyenergy) during a bout of foraging, taken as a whole. Energy will,in fact, be extracted in bursts because the food is distributed patchily;the forager will sometimes move between patches, during whichtime its intake of energy will be zero. But once in a patch, theforager will extract energy in a manner described by the curvesin Figure 9.22a. Its initial rate of extraction will be high, but as
time progresses and the resources are depleted, the rate ofextraction will steadily decline. Of course, the rate will itselfdepend on the initial contents of the patch and on the forager’sefﬁciency and motivation (Figure 9.22a).
The problem under consideration
is this: at what point should a foragerleave a patch? If it left all patchesimmediately after reaching them, thenit would spend most of its time travel-
ing between patches, and its overall rate of intake would be low.If it stayed in all patches for considerable lengths of time, then itwould spend little time traveling, but it would spend extendedperiods in depleted patches, and its overall rate of intake would
again be low. Some intermediate stay-time is therefore optimal.In addition, though, the optimal stay-time must clearly be greaterfor proﬁtable patches than for unproﬁtable ones, and it must dependon the proﬁtability of the environment as a whole.
Consider, in particular, the forager in Figure 9.22b. It is for-
aging in an environment where food is distributed patchily andwhere some patches are more valuable than others. The average
traveling time between patches is t
t. This is therefore the length
of time the forager can expect to spend on average after leavingone patch before it ﬁnds another. The forager in Figure 9.22b hasarrived at an average patch for its particular environment, and ittherefore follows an average extraction curve. In order to forage
optimally it must maximize its rate of energy intake not merelyfor its period in the patch, but for the whole period since its depar-ture from the last patch (i.e. for the period t
t+s, where sis the
stay-time in the patch).
If it leaves the patch rapidly then this period will be short 
(tt+sshortin Figure 9.22b). But by the same token, little energy
will be extracted ( Eshort). The rate of extraction (for the whole period
tt+s) will be given by the slope of the line OS (i.e. Eshort/(tt+sshort)).
On the other hand, if the forager remains for a long period ( slong)
then far more energy will be extracted ( Elong); but, the overall rate
of extraction (the slope of OL) will be little changed. To maxim-
ize the rate of extraction over the period tt+s, it is necessary to
maximize the slope of the line from O to the extraction curve.This is achieved simply by making the line a tangent to the curve(OP in Figure 9.22b). No line from O to the curve can be steeper,and the stay-time associated with it is therefore optimal ( s
opt).
The optimal solution for the for-
ager in Figure 9.22b, therefore, is toleave that patch when its extractionrate is equal to (tangential to) the slope
of OP, i.e. it should leave at point P. In fact, Charnov, and Parkerand Stuart, found that the optimal solution for the forager is toleave all patches, irrespective of their proﬁtability, at the sameextraction rate (i.e. the same ‘marginal value’). This extraction rateis given by the slope of the tangent to the average extraction curve(e.g. in Figure 9.22b), and it is therefore the maximum averageoverall rate for that environment as a whole.
••30 min 30 min
30 min 30 min
01.0
0.5 Proportion of larvae(a)
12Fed (n = 38)
Widespread movement
01.0
0.5
12Unfed  (n = 42)
01.0
0.5
12Net-building
01.0
0.5
12
Time (h)04
23
1
0 1 02 03 05 0 +Mean number of
predators per sample(b)
Biomass of prey
per sample (mg dry weight)Figure 9.21 (a) On arrival in a patch,
ﬁfth-instar Plectrocnemia conspersa larvae
that encounter and eat a chironomid prey
item at the beginning of the experiment(‘fed’) quickly cease wandering and
commence net-building. Predators that failto encounter a prey item (‘unfed’) exhibitmuch more widespread movement duringthe ﬁrst 30 min of the experiment, and aresigniﬁcantly more likely to move out of the patch. (b) Directly density-dependentaggregative response of ﬁfth-instar larvae ina natural environment expressed as meannumber of predators against combined
biomass of chironomid and stoneﬂy prey per 0.0625 m
2sample of streambed 
(n=40). (After Hildrew & Townsend,
1980; Townsend & Hildrew, 1980.)
when should a
forager leave a patchthat it is depleting?
how to maximizeoverall energy intakeEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 289•• ••290 CHAPTER 9
Time
Enters patchRate of energy extraction (        )
or cumulative energy extracted (        )High productivity patch and/or high
forager efficiency
High productivity patch and/or high forager efficiency
Low productivity patch and/or high forager efficiencyLow productivity patch and/or high
forager efficiency
0(a)
Cumulative energy extracted
TimeOSPL(b)
Elong
Eopt
Eshort
tt tt + slongtt + sshort tt + sopt
Highproductivitypatch
Low
productivitypatchAverageCumulative energy extracted(c)
shighslong ttsshort tt slow(d)
Short ttHigh
average
Low average
Long tt
slow shigh(e)
Figure 9.22 The marginal value theorem. (a) When a forager enters a patch, its rate of energy extraction is initially high (especially 
in a highly productive patch or where the forager has a high foraging efﬁciency), but this rate declines with time as the patch  becomes
depleted. The cumulative energy intake approaches an asymptote. (b) The options for a forager. The solid colored curve is cumul ative
energy extracted from an average patch, and ttis the average traveling time between patches. The rate of energy extraction (which should
be maximized) is energy extracted divided by total time, i.e. the slope of a straight line from the origin to the curve. Short stays in the
patch (slope =Eshort/(tt+sshort)) and long stays (slope =Elong/(tt+slong)) both have lower rates of energy extraction (shallower slopes) than a
stay ( sopt) which leads to a line just tangential to the curve. soptis therefore the optimum stay-time, giving the maximum overall rate of
energy extraction. Allpatches should be abandoned at the same rate of energy extraction (the slope of the line OP). (c) Low productivity
patches should be abandoned after shorter stays than high productivity patches. (d) Patches should be abandoned more quickly wh en
traveling time is short than when it is long. (e) Patches should be abandoned more quickly when the average overall productivit y is high
than when it is low.EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 290••THE NATURE OF PREDATION 291
The model therefore conﬁrms that
the optimal stay-time should be greater
in more productive patches than inless productive patches (Figure 9.22c).
Moreover, for the least productive patches (where the extraction
rate is never as high as OP) the stay-time should be zero. Themodel also predicts that all patches should be depleted such thatthe ﬁnal extraction rate from each is the same (i.e. the ‘marginalvalue’ of each is the same); and it predicts that stay-times shouldbe longer in environments where the traveling time betweenpatches is longer (Figure 9.22d) and that stay-times should be longerwhere the environment as a whole is less proﬁtable (Figure 9.22e).
Encouragingly, there is evidence
from a number of cases that lends sup-
port to the marginal value theorem. Inone of the ﬁrst tests of the theory,
Cowie (1977) considered the prediction set out in Figure 9.22d:that a forager should spend longer in each patch when the travel-ing time is longer. He used captive great tits in a large indooraviary, and got the birds to forage for small pieces of mealwormhidden in sawdust-ﬁlled plastic cups – the cups were ‘patches’. Allpatches on all occasions contained the same number of prey, but traveling time was manipulated by covering the cups withcardboard lids that varied in their tightness and therefore variedin the time needed to prize them off. Birds foraged alone, andCowie used six in all, subjecting each to two habitats. One of thesehabitats always had longer traveling times (tighter lids) than 
the other. For each bird in each habitat Cowie measured the average traveling time and the curve of cumulative food intakewithin a patch. He then used the marginal value theorem to predict the optimal stay-time in habitats with different travelingtimes, and compared these predictions with the stay-times he 
actually observed. As Figure 9.23 shows, the correspondencewas quite close. It was closer still when he took account of the fact that there was a net loss of energy when the birds weretraveling between patches.
Predictions of the marginal value theorem have also been exam-
ined through the behavior of the egg parasitoid, Anaphes victus ,
attacking the beetle Listronotus oregonensis in a laboratory setting
(Boivin et al. , 2004). Patches differed in quality by virtue of the
varying proportions of hosts already parasitized at the start of the
experiment, and in line with the theorem’s predictions, parasitoidsstayed longer in the more proﬁtable patches (Figure 9.24a).However, contrary to a further prediction, the marginal rate ofﬁtness gain (the rate of progeny production in the ﬁnal 10 min
before leaving a patch) was greatest in the initially mostproﬁtable patches (Figure 9.24b).
As was the case with optimal diet
theory, the risk of being preyed uponcan be expected to modify the pre-dicted outcomes of optimal patch use. With this in mind, Morris andDavidson (2000) compared the giving-up food extraction rates of white-footed mice ( Peromyscus 
leucopus ) in a forest habitat (where predation risk is low) and a
forest-edge habitat (where predation risk is high). They provided‘patches’ (containers) with 4 g of millet grain in 11 foraging sitesin the two habitat types, and in both habitat types some sites were
in relatively open situations and others were beneath shrubs. Theythen monitored the grain remaining at the time that the patcheswere abandoned on two separate days. Their results (Figure 9.25)supported the predictions that mice should abandon patches at
••Travel time (s)(a) (c)
096
83 2 16 2480
644832
16Time in patch (s)(b)
096
83 2 16 2480
644832
16
Figure 9.23 (a) An experimental ‘tree’ for great tits, with three patches. (b) Predicted optimal time in a patch plotted against traveling
time ( ), together with the observed mean points (± SE) for six birds, each in two environments. (c) The same data points, and th e
predicted time taking into account the energetic costs of traveling between patches. (After Cowie, 1977; from Krebs, 1978.)
predictions of 
the marginal value theorem . . .
. . . supported bysome experiments
optimal patch use predictions aremodiﬁed when thereis a risk of beingpreyed uponEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 291292 CHAPTER 9
higher harvest rates in vulnerable edge habitats than in safe 
forest habitats, particularly in open situations (where predationrisk is highest in each habitat).
A much fuller review of tests of the
marginal value theorem is provided,
for example, by Krebs and Kacelnik(1991). The picture this conveys is one of encouraging but not perfectcorrespondence – much like the balance
of the results presented here. The main reason for the imperfec-tion is that the animals, unlike the modelers, are not omniscient.As was clear in the case of the white-footed mice, they may need to spend time doing things other than foraging (e.g. avoiding predators). Foragers may also need to spend time learning about 
and sampling their environment, and are none the less likely toproceed in their foraging with imperfect information about thedistribution of their hosts. For the parasitoids in Figure 9.24, forexample, Boivin et al. (2004) suggest that they seem to base their
assessment of overall habitat quality on the quality of the ﬁrst patchthey encounter; that is, they ‘learn’ but their learned assessmentmay still be wrong. Such a strategy would be adaptive, though,if there was considerable variation in quality between generations(so that each generation had to learn anew), but little variation
in quality between patches within a generation (so that the ﬁrstpatch encountered was a fair indication of quality overall).
Nevertheless, in spite of their limited information, animals 
seem often to come remarkably close to the predicted strategy.Ollason (1980) developed a mechanistic model to account for thisin the great tits studied by Cowie. Ollason’s is a memory model.It assumes that an animal has a ‘remembrance of past food’, whichOllason likens to a bath of water without a plug. Fresh remem-brance ﬂows in every time the animal feeds. But remembrance
is also draining away continuously. The rate of input depends on the animal’s feeding efﬁciency and the productivity of the current feeding area. The rate of outﬂow depends on the animal’sability to memorize and the amount of remembrance. Remem-brance drains away quickly, for example, when the amount is large(high water level) or the memorizing ability is poor (tall, narrowbath). Ollason’s model simply proposes that an animal should stayin a patch until remembrance ceases to rise; an animal should leave
a patch when its rate of input from feeding is slower than its rateof declining remembrance.
An animal foraging consistently
with Ollason’s model behaves in a wayvery similar to that predicted by themarginal value theorem. This is shown for the case of Cowie’sgreat tits in Figure 9.26. As Ollason himself remarks, this showsthat to forage in a patchy environment in a way that approximatesclosely to optimality, an animal need not be omniscient, it does
not need to sample and it does not need to perform numericalanalyses to ﬁnd the maxima of functions of many variables: all it
•• ••2000Patch residence time (s)
100 75 25008000
50
Initial percentage of parasitized hosts(a)
7000
6000500040003000
100048 h
3 h
Progeny produced (no. min–1)
100 75 250.00000.003
50
Initial percentage of parasitized hosts(b)
0.002
0.001
48 h3 hGiving-up density (g)
100.52.53.5
3.0
1.01.52.0
2 1 2
DayEdge
ForestShrub
OpenFigure 9.24 (a) When the parasitoid
Anaphes victus attacked the beetle
Listronotus oregonensis in patches of 
16 hosts, a varying percentage of which
had already been parasitized, parasitoids
remained longer in the more proﬁtablepatches: those with the smaller percentageof parasitized hosts. (b) However, themarginal gain rate in ﬁtness – the numberof progeny produced per minute in theﬁnal 10 min before leaving a patch – wasgreatest in the initially most proﬁtablepatches. Bars represent standard errors.(After Boivin et al. , 2004.)
Figure 9.25 The mass of millet grain remaining (giving-up
density, g) was higher in patches in the open (riskier) than in
paired patches located under shrubs (safer), and was higher inforest-edge habitat (higher predation) than in forest (lowerpredation). (After Morris & Davidson, 2000.)
predicted and
observed behaviorsdo not correspondperfectly
mechanistic modelsof optimal foragingEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 292THE NATURE OF PREDATION 293
needs to do is to remember, and to leave each patch if it is not
feeding as fast as it remembers doing. As Krebs and Davies(1993) point out, this is no more surprising than the observationthat the same birds can ﬂy without any formal qualiﬁcation inaerodynamics.
Mechanistic models have also been developed and tested for
a range of patterns of parasitoid attack (like that in Figure 9.24)
(see Vos et al., 1998; Boivin et al., 2004). These highlight the import-
ant distinction between ‘rule of thumb’ behavior, where animalsfollow innate and unvarying rules, and learned behavior, whererules are subject to modiﬁcation in the light of the forager’simmediate experience. The weight of evidence suggests thatlearning plays at least some role in most foragers’ decisions.There is an important distinction, too, between ‘incremental’ and
‘decremental’ behavior. With incremental behavior each suc-cessful attack in a patch increases the forager’s chance of stayingthere. This is likely to be adaptive when there is considerable variation in quality between patches, because it encourageslonger stay-times in better quality patches. With ‘decremental’behavior each successful attack in a patch decreases the forager’s
chance of staying there. This is likely to be adaptive when all patchesare of approximately the same quality, because it encourages foragers to leave depleted patches.
Thus, Ollason’s model for great tits incorporated rule of
thumb, incremental behavior. Boivin et al. , on the other hand,
found their parasitoids to be exhibiting learned, decrementalbehavior: a parasitoid attacking a healthy host, for example, was
1.43 times more likely to leave a patch thereafter, and one reject-ing a host that had already been attacked was 1.11 times morelikely to leave. Vos et al. (1998), by contrast, found incremental
behavior when the parasitoid Cotesia glomerata attacked its butterﬂy larva host, Pieris brassicae : each successful encounter
increased its tendency to remain in a patch. For both the great
tit and parasitoids, therefore, optimal foraging and mechanisticmodels are seen to be compatible and complementary in explain-ing how a predator has achieved its observed foraging pattern,and why that pattern has been favored by natural selection.
Finally, the principles of optimal
foraging are also being applied toinvestigations of the foraging strategies
of plants for nutrients (reviewed byHutchings & de Kroon, 1994). When does it pay to produce longstolons moving rapidly from patch to patch? When does it payto concentrate root growth within a limited volume, foraging froma patch until it is close to depletion? Certainly, it is good to seesuch intellectual cross-fertilization across the taxonomic divide.
9.6.3 Ideal free and related distributions: 
aggregation and interference
We can see, then, that consumers tend
to aggregate in proﬁtable patches wheretheir expected rate of food consumptionis highest. Yet we might also expect that consumers will competeand interfere with one another (discussed further in Chapter 10),
thereby reducing their per capita consumption rate. It follows from this that patches that are initially most proﬁtable becomeimmediately less proﬁtable because they attract most consumers.We might therefore expect the consumers to redistribute them-selves, and it is perhaps not surprising that the observed patternsof predator distributions across prey patches vary substantially fromcase to case. But can we make some sense of this variation in pattern?
In an early attempt to do so, it was
proposed that if a consumer forages
optimally, the process of redistributionwill continue until the proﬁtabilities ofall patches are equal (Fretwell & Lucas, 1970; Parker, 1970). Thiswill happen because as long as there are dissimilar proﬁtabilities,consumers should leave less proﬁtable patches and be attractedto more proﬁtable ones. Fretwell and Lucas called the consequentdistribution the ideal free distribution: the consumers are ‘ideal’in their judgement of proﬁtability, and ‘free’ to move from patchto patch. Consumers were also assumed to be equal. Hence, withan ideal free distribution, because all patches come to have thesame proﬁtability, all consumers have the same consumption rate.There are some simple cases where consumers appear to conform
to an ideal free distribution insofar as they distribute themselvesin proportion to the proﬁtabilities of different patches (e.g.Figure 9.27a), but even in such cases one of the underlyingassumptions is likely to have been violated (e.g. Figure 9.27b –all consumers are not equal).
•• ••
Time in patch (s)
32 24 800164896
16
Travel time (s)326480
Figure 9.26 Cowie’s (1977) great tit data (see Figure 9.23)
compared to the predictions of Ollason’s (1980) mechanistic
memory model.optimal foraging 
in plants
the ideal freedistribution . . .
. . . is a balancebetween attractiveand repellant forcesEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 293294 CHAPTER 9
The early ideas have been much
modiﬁed taking account, for example,
of unequal competitors (see Milinski & Parker, 1991; Tregenza, 1995, for
reviews). In particular, ideal free theory was put in a more 
ecological context by Sutherland (1983) when he explicitly incorporated predator handling times and mutual interferenceamongst the predators. He found that predators should be dis-tributed such that the proportion of predators in site i, p
i, is related
to the proportion of prey (or hosts) in site i, hi, by the equation:
pi=k(hi1/m) (9.2)
where mis the coefﬁcient of interference, and k is a ‘normaliz-
ing constant’ such that the proportions, pi, add up to 1. It is now
possible to see how the patch to patch distribution of predators
might be determined jointly by interference and the selection bythe predators of intrinsically proﬁtable patches.
If there is no interference amongst the predators, then m=0.
All should exploit only the patch with the highest prey density
(Figure 9.28), leaving lower density patches devoid of predators.
If there is a small or moderate amount of interference (i.e. 
m>0, but m<1 – a biologically realistic range), then high-density
prey patches should still attract a disproportionate number of predators (Figure 9.28). In other words, there should be an aggre-gative response by the predators, which is not only directly density dependent, but actually accelerates with increasing preydensity in a patch. Hence, the prey’s risk of predation might itself
be expected to be directly density dependent: the greatest risk ofpredation in the highest prey density patches (like the examplesin Figure 9.20c, d).
With a little more interference ( m≈1) the proportion of the
predator population in a patch should still increase with the pro-portion of prey, but now it should do so more or less linearlyrather than accelerating, such that the ratio of predators : prey isroughly the same in all patches (Figure 9.28, and, for example,Figure 9.20a). Here, therefore, the risk of predation might beexpected to be the same in all patches, and hence independent
of prey density.
Finally, with a great deal of interference ( m>1) the highest
density prey patches should have the lowest ratio of predators :prey (Figure 9.28). The risk of predation might therefore beexpected to be greatest in the lowest prey density patches, andhence inversely density dependent (like the data in Figure 9.20e).
It is clear, therefore, that the range of patterns amongst the
data in Figure 9.20 reﬂects a shifting balance between the forcesof attraction and of repulsion. Predators are attracted to highly
proﬁtable patches; but they are repelled by the presence of otherpredators that have been attracted in the same way.
This description, however, of the
relationship between the distributionof predators and the distribution ofpredation risk has been peppered with ‘ might be expected to ’s. The
•• ••
Number of pieces of bread eaten
N2
A612
Individuals ranked in order of success(b)
410
8
BCDEFGH I M JKLNumber of ducks
420 300 1200061218
180
Time (s)(a)
41016
2814
60 360 240Figure 9.27 (a) When 33 ducks were 
fed pieces of bread at two stations around
a pond (with a proﬁtability ratio of 2 : 1), the number of ducks at the poorer station,shown here, rapidly approached one-third
of the total, in apparent conformity withthe predictions of ideal free theory. (b)However, contrary to the assumptions and other predictions of simple theory, theducks were not all equal. (After Harper,1982; from Milinski & Parker, 1991.)Proportion of predators (pi)
Proportion of prey in the ith patch ( hi)m = 0.3
m = 0.6
m = 1.0
m > 1m       0
Figure 9.28 The effect of the interference coefﬁcient, m, on the
expected distribution of predators amongst patches of prey varying
in the proportion of the total prey population they contain (andhence, in their ‘intrinsic’ proﬁtability). (After Sutherland, 1983.)incorporating a range
of interferencecoefﬁcients
pseudo-interferenceEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 294THE NATURE OF PREDATION 295
reason is that the relationship also depends on a range of factors
not so far considered. For example, Figure 9.29 shows a case wherethe parasitoid Trichogramma pretiosum aggregates in high-density
patches of its moth host, but the risk of parasitism to the mothis greatest in low-density host patches. The explanation probably
lies in time wasted by parasitoids in high-density host patches, dealing with already parasitized hosts that may still attract para-sitoids because they are not physically removed from a patch (unlikepreyed-upon prey) (Morrison & Strong, 1981; Hassell, 1982). Thus,earlier parasitoids in a patch may interfere indirectly with laterarrivals, in that the previous presence of a parasitoid in a patchmay reduce the effective rate at which later arrivals attack unpara-sitized hosts. This effect has been termed ‘pseudo-interference’(Free et al. , 1977); its potentially important effects on population
dynamics are discussed in Chapter 10.
Expected patterns are modiﬁed 
further still if we incorporate learning
by the predators, or the costs of migra-tion between patches (Bernstein et al. ,
1988, 1991). With a realistic value of m(= 0.3), the aggregative
response of predators is directly density dependent (as expected)as long as the predators’ learning response is strong relative tothe rate at which they can deplete patches. But if their learningresponse is weak, predators may be unable to track the changesin prey density that result from patch depletion. Their distributionwill then drift to one that is independent of the density of prey.
Similarly, when the cost of migration is low, the predators’
aggregative response remains directly density dependent (with 
m=0.3) (Figure 9.30a). When the cost of migration is increased,
however, it still pays predators in the poorest patches to move,but for others the costs of migration can outweigh the potentialgains of moving. For these, the distribution across prey patchesis random. This results in inverse density dependence in mortality
rate between intermediate and good patches, and in a ‘domed’relationship overall (Figure 9.30b). When the cost of migrationis very high, it does not pay predators to move whatever patchthey are in – mortality is inversely density dependent across all
patches (Figure 9.30c).
Clearly, there is no shortage of potential causes for the wide
range of types of distributions of predators, and of mortalityrates, across prey patches (see Figures 9.20 and 9.29). Their consequences, in terms of population dynamics, are one of thetopics dealt with in the chapter that follows. This highlights the crucial importance of forging links between behavioral and population ecology.
Summary
Predation is the consumption of one organism by another, in which
the prey is alive when the predator ﬁrst attacks it. There are two main ways in which predators can be classiﬁed. The ﬁrst is‘taxonomic’ – carnivores consume animals, herbivores consumeplants, etc.– and the second is ‘functional’, in which true predators,
grazers, parasitoids and parasites are distinguished.
The effects of herbivory on a plant depend on which herbi-
vores are involved, which plant parts are affected, and the timing of attack relative to the plant’s development. Leaf-biting,sap-sucking, mining, ﬂower and fruit damage and root pruningcan be expected to differ in the effect they have on the plant.Because the plant usually remains alive in the short term, the effectsof herbivory are also crucially dependent on the response of theplant. The evolutionary selection pressure exerted by herbivores
has led to a variety of plant physical and chemical defenses that
•• ••
Counts per patch
0
25515
0(a)
10
7550
100Hosts per patch
2 4 8 16 32
Total parasitoids
Parasitism (%)
0
252080
1(b)
60
7550
100Hosts per patch
2 4 8 16 32
Total parasitoids40
Fgiure 9.29 (a) The aggregative response of the egg parasitoid, Trichogramma pretiosum , which aggregates on patches with high densities
of its host Plodia interpunctella . (b) The resultant distribution of ill effects: hosts on high-density patches are least likely to be parasitized.
(After Hassell, 1982.)
learning and
migrationEIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 295296 CHAPTER 9
resist attack. These may be present and effective continuously 
(constitutive defense) or increased production may be induced byattack (inducible defense). It is not straightforward to determinewhether the supposed ‘defenses’ actually have measurable, neg-ative effects on the herbivore and positive consequences for the
plant, especially after the costs of mounting the response havebeen taken into account. We discuss the difﬁculties of revealingsuch effects and review the relationships between herbivory andplant survival and fecundity.
More generally, the immediate effect of predation on a popu-
lation of prey is not always predictably harmful, ﬁrst because the individuals that are killed are not always a random sample(and may be those with the lowest potential to contribute to the population’s future) and second because of compensatory
changes in the growth, survival or reproduction of the survivingprey (especially via reduced competition for a limiting resource).From the predator’s point of view, an increase in the amount offood consumed can be expected to lead to increased rates of growth,development and birth, and decreased rates of mortality. How-ever, there are a number of factors that complicate this simplerelationship between consumption rate and consumer beneﬁt.
Consumers can be classiﬁed on a continuum from monophagy
(feeding on a single prey type) to polyphagy (many prey types).The preferences of many consumers are ﬁxed – they are main-tained irrespective of the relative availabilities of alternative food
types. But many others switch their preference, such that fooditems are eaten disproportionately often when they are common.A mixed diet may be favored ﬁrst because each food type containsa different undesirable toxic chemical. More generally, a general-
ist strategy would be favored if a consumer has more to gain thanlose in accepting low-quality items, once encountered, rather thanignoring them and continuing to search. We discuss this in thecontext of optimal diet theory, the aim of which is to predict theforaging strategy to be expected under speciﬁed conditions.
Food is generally distributed patchily and ecologists have
been particularly interested in patch preferences of consumerswhere patches vary in the density of food or prey items they contain. We describe the behaviors that lead to aggregated dis-
tributions and the nature of the distribution patterns that result.The advantages to a consumer of spending more time in higherproﬁtability patches are easy to see. However, the detailed alloca-tion of time to different patches is a subtle problem, dependingon the precise differentials in proﬁtability, the average proﬁtabil-ity of the environment as a whole, the distance between patches,and so on. This is the domain of the theory of optimal patch use.The predictions of both optimal foraging and optimal patch usetheory have to be modiﬁed when there is a simultaneous risk ofa consumer being preyed upon.
••Mortality (arcsin transformed)
200 150 500.500.71.01.1
100
Prey density(a)
0.9
0.8
0.6
200 150 500.400.60.91.1
100
Prey density(b)
0.8
0.7
0.51.0
200 150 500.201.2
100
Prey density(c)
0.8
0.61.0
0.4
Figure 9.30 The effect of a cost to migration in predators distributing themselves across prey patches in a simulation model. The
interference coefﬁcient, m, is 0.3 and would lead to direct density dependence in the absence of a migration cost. (a) Low migration cost:
direct density dependence is maintained. (b) Intermediate cost: a ‘domed’ relationship. (c) High cost: inverse density dependen ce. (After
Bernstein et al. , 1991.)EIPC09  10/24/05  2:01 PM  Page 296••10.1 Introduction: patterns of abundance and
the need for their explanation
We turn now to the effects of predation on the population
dynamics of the predator and its prey, where even a limited survey of the data reveals a varied array of patterns. There arecertainly cases where predation has a profoundly detrimental effecton a prey population. For example, the ‘vedalia’ ladybird beetle
(Rodolia cardinalis ) is famous for having virtually eradicated the
cottony cushion-scale insect ( Icerya purchasi ), a pest that threatened
the California citrus industry in the late 1880s (see Section 15.2.5).On the other hand, there are many cases where predators andherbivores have no apparent effect on their prey’s dynamics or abundance. For example, the weevil Apion ulicis has been
introduced into many parts of the world in an attempt to con-trol the abundance of gorse bushes ( Ulex europaeus ), and it has often
become well established. The situation in Chile, however, is fairly
typical, where, despite eating on average around half, and some-times up to 94%, of the seeds produced, it has had no apprecia-ble impact on gorse invasiveness (Norambuena & Piper, 2000).
There are also examples that appear to show predator and prey
populations linked together by coupled oscillations in abundance(Figure 10.1), but there are many more examples in which pred-ator and prey populations ﬂuctuate in abundance apparently independently of one another.
It is clearly a major task for ecologists to develop an under-
standing of the patterns of predator–prey abundance, and toaccount for the differences from one example to the next. It isequally clear, though, that none of these predator and prey pop-ulations exist as isolated pairs, but rather as parts of multispecies
systems, and that all these species are affected by environmentalconditions. These broader issues of what determines a species’abundance are taken up again in Chapter 14. However, as withany complex process in science, we cannot understand the fullcomplexity without a reasonable understanding of the components– in this case, populations of predators and prey. Hence, this 
chapter deals with the consequences of predator–prey interactionsfor the dynamics of the populations concerned.
The approach will be ﬁrstly to use simple models to deduce
the effects produced by different components of the interactions,teasing out the separate effects before seeking to understandthose effects in combination. Then, ﬁeld and experimental data
will be examined to see whether the deductions appear to be 
supported or refuted. In fact, simple models are most usefulwhen their predictions are notsupported by real data – as long
as the reason for the discrepancy can subsequently be discovered.Conﬁrmation of a model’s predictions provides consolidation; refutation with subsequent explanation is progress.
10.2 The basic dynamics of predator–prey and
plant–herbivore systems: a tendency 
towards cycles
There have been two main series of models developed as
attempts to understand predator–prey dynamics. Both will be examined here. The ﬁrst (Section 10.2.1) is based on differentialequations (and hence, applies most readily to populations inwhich breeding is continuous), but relies heavily on simple
graphical models (Rosenzweig & MacArthur, 1963). The second(Section 10.2.3) uses difference equations to model host–parasitoidinteractions with discrete generations. Despite this taxonomic limitation, these models have the advantage of having been sub-ject to rigorous mathematical exploration. (We have also notedpreviously that there are a very large number of important par-asitoid species.) Although the two series of models are explainedseparately, they have, of course, a common aim (to advance ourunderstanding of predator–prey dynamics), and they can increas-
ingly be seen as ends of a discrete-to-continuous spectrum of mathematical approaches.
Chapter 10
The Population Dynamics 
of PredationEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 297298 CHAPTER 10
10.2.1 The Lotka–Volterra model
The simplest differential equation model is known (like the
model of interspeciﬁc competition) by the name of its originators:Lotka–Volterra (Volterra, 1926; Lotka, 1932). This will serve asa useful point of departure. The model has two components: P,
the numbers present in a predator (or consumer) population, and
N, the numbers or biomass present in a prey or plant population.
We assume initially that in the absence of consumers the prey
population increases exponentially (see Section 5.9):
dN/dt=rN. (10.1)
But prey individuals are removed by predators at a rate that dependson the frequency of predator–prey encounters. Encounters willincrease with the numbers of predators ( P) and the numbers of
prey ( N). However, the exact number encountered and success-
fully consumed will depend on the searching and attacking
efﬁciency of the predator: a, sometimes also called the ‘attack rate’.
The consumption rate of prey will thus be aPN, and overall:
dN/dt=rN−aPN. (10.2)
In the absence of prey, predator numbers in the model are
assumed to decline exponentially through starvation:
dP/dt=−qP, (10.3)
where qis the predator mortality rate. This is counteracted by
predator birth, the rate of which is assumed to depend on only
•• ••Log (number)
0123
0
Time (weeks)(c)
90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 1020
10Chlorella vulgaris (    )
(106 cells ml–1)
02.55.0
0
Time (days)(b)
30 20 10
Bracionus calyciflorus (    )
(females ml–1)
09
6
3
Thousands of lynxThousands of hares
04080120160
1850 1875 1900 1925
Year(a)
Snowshoe hare
Lynx
Figure 10.1 Coupled oscillations in 
the abundance of predators and prey. 
(a) The snowshoe hare ( Lepus americanus )
and the Canadian lynx ( Lynx canadensis ) as
determined by the number of pelts lodged
with the Hudson Bay Company. (AfterMacLulick, 1937.) (b) Parthenogeneticfemale rotifers, Bracionus calyciﬂorus
(predators, 
/H17033), and unicellular green algae,
Chlorella vulgaris (prey, 7) in laboratory
cultures. (After Yoshida et al. , 2003). 
(c) The parasitoid Venturia canescens ()
and its moth host Plodia interpunctella
( ) in laboratory cultures. (AfterBjørnstad et al. , 2001.)
the Lotka–Volterra
prey equationEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 298THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 299
two things: the rate at which food is consumed, aPN, and the pre-
dator’s efﬁciency, f, at turning this food into predator offspring.
Predator birth rate is therefore faPN , and overall:
dP/dt=faPN −qP. (10.4)
Equations 10.2 and 10.4 constitute the Lotka–Volterra model.
The properties of this model can be investigated by ﬁnding
zero isoclines. Zero isoclines were described for models of two-
species competition in Section 8.4.1. Here, there are separate zeroisoclines for the predators and prey, both of which are drawn on a graph of prey density ( x-axis) against predator density ( y-axis).
Each is a line joining those combinations of predator and prey
density that lead either to an unchanging prey population (dN/dt=0; prey zero isocline) or an unchanging predator popu-
lation (d P/dt=0; predator zero isocline). Having drawn, say, a prey
zero isocline, we know that combinations to one side of it leadto prey decrease, and combinations to the other to prey increase.Thus, as we shall see, if we plot the prey and predator zero iso-clines on the same ﬁgure, we can begin to determine the patternof the dynamics of the joint predator–prey populations.
In the case of the prey (Equation 10.2), when:
dN/dt=0, rN=aPN (10.5)
or:
P=r/a. (10.6)
Thus, since rand aare constants, the
prey zero isocline is a line for which P
itself is a constant (Figure 10.2a). Below
it, predator abundance is low and the prey increase; above it, preda-
tor abundance is high and the prey decrease.
Likewise, for the predators (Equation 10.4), when:
dP/dt=0, faPN =qP (10.7)
or:
N=q/fa. (10.8)
The predator zero isocline is therefore a line along which Nis
constant (Figure 10.2b). To the left, prey abundance is low and
the predators decrease; to the right, prey abundance is high andthe predators increase.
Putting the two isoclines together (Figure 10.2c) shows the
behavior of joint populations. Predators increase in abundance whenthere are large numbers of prey, but this leads to an increasedpredation pressure on the prey, and thus to a decrease in preyabundance. This then leads to a food shortage for predators and
a decrease in predator abundance, which leads to a relaxation ofpredation pressure and an increase in prey abundance, which leads
to an increase in predator abundance, and so on (Figure 10.2d).Thus, predator and prey populations undergo ‘coupled oscillations’in abundance, which continue indeﬁnitely.
The Lotka–Volterra model, then, is
useful in pointing to this underlying
tendency for predator–prey interactionsto generate ﬂuctuations in the preypopulation tracked by ﬂuctuations in the predator population. The detailedbehavior of the model, however,should not be taken seriously, because the cycles it exhibits are‘structurally unstable’, showing ‘neutral stability’. That is, the popu-lations would follow precisely the same cycles indeﬁnitely, but
only until some external inﬂuence shifted them to new values,after which they would follow new cycles indeﬁnitely (Figure 10.2e).In practice, of course, environments are continually changing, and populations would continually be ‘shifted to new values’. Apopulation following the Lotka–Volterra model would, therefore,not exhibit regular cycles, but, because of repeated disturbance,ﬂuctuate erratically. No sooner would it start one cycle than itwould be diverted to a new one.
For a population to exhibit regular and recognizable cycles,
the cycles must themselves be stable: when an external inﬂu-ence changes the population level, there must be a tendency toreturn to the original cycle. In fact, as we shall see, predator–prey models (once we move beyond the very limiting assump-
tions of the Lotka–Volterra model) are capable of generating a whole range of abundance patterns: stable-point equilibria,multigeneration cycles, one-generation cycles, chaos, etc. – arange repeated in surveys of real populations. The challenge isto discover what light the models can throw on the behavior of real populations.
10.2.2 Delayed density dependence
The basic mechanism generating the
coupled oscillations in these predator–prey interactions is a series of time-delayed ‘ numerical responses ’,
i.e. changes in one species’ abundance in response to the abund-ance of the other species. The ﬁrst is a time delay between
‘many prey’ and ‘many predators’ (arising because the responseof predator abundance to high prey abundance cannot occur instan-taneously). There may then be another time delay between‘many predators’ and ‘few prey’, and then between ‘few prey’ and‘few predators’, and so on. In practice, therefore, even where coupled oscillations exist, their exact shape is likely to reﬂect thevarying delays, and strengths, of the different numerical responses.Certainly, the shapes of apparent coupled oscillations in real populations are varied, and not all are symmetric like those gen-
erated by the Lotka–Volterra model (see Figure 10.1).
•• ••properties revealed
by zero isoclinesthe Lotka–Volterrapredator equation
an underlyingtendency towardscoupled oscillations –which are structurallyunstable in this case
numerical responsesEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 299300 CHAPTER 10
These responses are density de-
pendent (see Section 5.2): they act to
reduce the size of relatively large populations and allow relatively smallpopulations to increase. Varley (1947)
introduced the term ‘delayed density
dependence’ to describe them. The strength of a delayed density-dependent effect is related not to the current abundance (that wouldbe direct density dependence) but to abundance at some time in
the past (i.e. the delay-length ago). Compared to direct densitydependence, delayed density dependence is relatively difﬁcult to
demonstrate. To see this, we can examine the coupled oscillationsproduced by a particular parasitoid–host model, shown in Fig-ure 10.3a (Hassell, 1985). The details of the model need not concern us, but note that the oscillations are damped: they get
gradually smaller over time until a stable equilibrium is reached.The prey population, subject to delayed density dependence, isregulated in size by the predator. In Section 5.6, we demonstrateddensity dependence by plotting kvalues against the log of dens-
ity; but when we plot the kvalues of predator-induced mortality
•• ••(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
N
P
Time NPPrey abundance ( N)Predator abundance (P)r
a
q
faNP
Time(e)
N
PDisturbance DisturbanceFigure 10.2 The Lotka–Volterra
predator–prey model. (a) The prey zero
isocline, with prey ( N) increasing in
abundance (arrows left to right) at lowerpredator densities (low P) and decreasing
at higher predator densities. (b) The
predator zero isocline, with predatorsincreasing in abundance (arrows pointingupwards) at higher prey densities anddecreasing at lower prey densities. (c) When the zero isoclines arecombined, the arrows can also becombined, and these joint arrowsprogress in anticlockwise circles. In 
other words, the joint population moveswith time from low predator/low prey(bottom left in (c)), to low predator/highprey (bottom right), to high predator/high prey, to high predator/low prey andback to low predator/low prey. Note,however, that the lowest prey abundance(‘9 o’clock’) comes one-quarter of a cyclebefore the lowest predator abundance (‘6 o’clock’ – anticlockwise movement).These coupled cycles of predator–preyabundance, continuing indeﬁnitely, areshown as numbers against time in (d).However, as shown in (e), these cyclesexhibit neutral stability: they continueindeﬁnitely if undisturbed, but eachdisturbance to a new abundance initiates a new, different series of neutrally stablecycles, around the same means but witha different amplitude.
the regulatory
tendencies of delayeddensity dependenceare relatively difﬁcultto demonstrateEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 300THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 301
against the log of prey density in that generation (Figure 10.3b),
no clear relationship is apparent. On the other hand, when thesame points are linked together, each generation to the next (Fig-ure 10.3c), they can be seen to describe an anticlockwise spiral.This spiraling is characteristic of delayed density dependence. Here,
because the oscillations are damped, the points spiral inwards tothe equilibrium point. Moreover, when we plot the kvalues of
predator-induced mortality against the log of prey density two gen-
erations previously (Figure 10.3d), the delayed density dependence
is clearly revealed by the positive relationship characteristic of density dependence in general. Indeed, the fact that a two-generation delay gives a better ﬁtting relationship than delays that are either shorter or longer, tells us that two generations isour best estimate of the delay in this case.
The regulatory effects of delayed density dependence are 
relatively easy to reveal for the model population of Figure 10.3,
because it is not subject to the ﬂuctuations of a natural environ-ment, it is not subject to the density-dependent attacks of any other predator, it is not subject to the inaccuracies of samplingerror, and so on. Data of this quality, however, are rarely if ever available for natural or even experimental populations. Wereturn to the question of uncovering and integrating delayed density-dependent effects into an overall account of what deter-mines abundance in Chapter 14. For now, though, this discussionhighlights the relationship between ‘regulation’ and ‘stability’ in
predator–prey interactions. Natural predator and prey populationstend to exhibit less violent and less regular ﬂuctuations than thosewe have seen generated by the simplest models. Most of the rest of this chapter describes the search for explanations for these
patterns and for the variations in dynamical pattern from case tocase. A population that remains roughly constant in size providesevidence for the effects of both regulatory and stabilizing forces.The delayed density dependence of a predator–prey interaction‘regulates’ in the sense of acting strongly on large populations andonly weakly on small populations. But, as we have already seen,it can hardly be said, typically, to stabilize either population. Whatfollows in this chapter is, therefore, in large part, a search for stab-ilizing forces that might complement the (delayed) regulatory forces
that occur inherently in predator–prey interactions.
10.2.3 The Nicholson–Bailey model
Turning now to parasitoids, the basic model (Nicholson &
Bailey, 1935) is again not so much realistic as a reasonable basisfrom which to start. Let H
tbe the number of hosts, and Ptthe
number of parasitoids in generation t; ris the intrinsic rate of nat-
ural increase of the host. If Hais the number of hosts attacked by
•• ••(c)
–0.50.5
Log host density0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.001.0k value(b)k value
–0.50.5
Log host density0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.001.0(a)Populations
010
Generations10 20 30 40 5020304050
N
P
(d)k value
0
Log host density,
two generations previously–0.4 0 0.8 1.2 1.61.0
0.20.40.60.8
0.4Figure 10.3 Delayed density dependence.
(a) A parasitoid–host model followed over
50 generations: despite oscillations, theparasitoid has a regulatory effect on thehost population. (b) For the same model,
the kvalue of generation mortality plotted
against the log of host density: no cleardensity-dependent relationship is apparent.(c) The points from (b) linked serially fromgeneration to generation: they spiral in ananticlockwise direction – a characteristic ofdelayed density dependence. (After Hassell,1985). (d) The kvalue of generation
mortality plotted against the log of host
density two generations previously: a cleardelayed density-dependent relationship isagain apparent.EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 301302 CHAPTER 10
parasitoids (in generation t), then, assuming no intraspeciﬁc
competition amongst the hosts (exponential growth – see
Section 4.7.1), and that each host can support only one parasitoid(commonly the case):
H
t+1=er(Ht−Ha), (10.9)
Pt+1=Ha. (10.10)
In other words, hosts that are not attacked reproduce, and thosethat are attacked yield not hosts but parasitoids.
To derive a simple formulation for H
a, let Etbe the number
of host–parasitoid encounters in generation t. Then, if Ais the
parasitoid’s searching efﬁciency:
Et=AHtPt (10.11)
and:
Et/Ht=APt. (10.12)
Note the similarity to the formulation in Equation 10.2.
Remember, though, that we are dealing with parasitoids, and hence
a single host can be encountered several times, although only oneencounter leads to successful parasitization (i.e. only one parasitoiddevelops). Predators, by contrast, would remove their prey andprevent re-encounters. Thus, Equation 10.2 dealt with instantan-eous rates, rather than numbers.
If encounters are assumed to occur
more or less at random, then the pro-portions of hosts that are encounteredzero, one, two or more times are givenby the successive terms in the appro-
priate ‘Poisson distribution’ (see any basic statistics textbook). The
proportion not encountered at all, p
0, would be given by e−Et/Ht,
and thus the proportion that isencountered (one or more times)
is 1−e−Et/Ht. The number encountered (or attacked) is then:
Ha=Ht(1−e−Et/Ht). (10.13)
Using this and Equation 10.12 to substitute into Equations 10.9
and 10.10 gives us:
Ht+1=Hte(r−APt)(10.14)
Pt+1=Ht(1−e(−APt)). (10.15)
This is the basic Nicholson–Bailey
model of a host–parasitoid interac-
tion. Its behavior is reminiscent of theLotka–Volterra model but it is evenless stable. An equilibrium combination of the two populations is a possibility, but even the slightest 
disturbance from this equilibrium leads to divergent coupledoscillations.
10.2.4 One-generation cycles
The coupled oscillations generated by the basic Lotka–Volterra
and Nicholson–Bailey models are multigeneration cycles, i.e.there are several generations between successive peaks (or troughs),and such oscillations have lain at the heart of most attempts to understand cyclic predator–prey dynamics. However, other 
models of host–parasitoid (and host–pathogen) systems are able to generate coupled oscillations just onehost generation in
length (Knell, 1998; see, for example, Figure 10.1c). On the otherhand, such ‘generation cycles’ can also occur in a population forreasons other than a predator–prey interaction – speciﬁcally as a result of competition between age classes within a population(Knell, 1998).
Predator–prey generation cycles occur essentially when the 
generation length of the consumer is roughly half that of its 
host – as it often is. Any small, chance peak in host abundancetends to generate a further peak in host abundance one host gen-eration later. But any associated peak in consumer abundanceoccurs half a host generation length later, creating a trough inhost abundance between the twin peaks. And this host trough creates a further host trough one generation later, but a consumertrough coinciding with the next host peak. Thus, the consumershave alternate ‘feasts’ and ‘famines’ that accentuate the originallysmall peaks and troughs in host abundance, and hence promoteone-generation cycles (Figure 10.4).
10.2.5 Predator–prey cycles in nature: or are they?
The inherent tendency for predator–prey interactions to generate
coupled oscillations in abundance might suggest an expectationof such oscillations in real populations. However, there are manyimportant aspects of predator and prey ecology that have not beenconsidered in the models derived so far; and as subsequent 
sections will show, these can greatly modify our expectations.Certainly, even if a population exhibits regular oscillations, thisdoes not necessarily provide support for the Lotka–Volterra,Nicholson–Bailey or any other simple model. We saw cyclesgenerated by intraspeciﬁc competition in Section 5.8, and we shallsee several other routes to cycles in subsequent chapters (see also Kendall et al. , 1999). At this point,
though, it is worth simply making thepoint that even when predators or
prey exhibit regular cycles in abund-ance, it is never easy to demonstrate thatthese are predator–prey cycles.
•• ••a model based 
on randomencounters . . .
. . . giving rise to(unstable) coupledoscillationshare and lynx: notthe simple predatorand prey they appearto beEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 302THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 303
The regular oscillations in the abundance of the snowshoe hare
and the Canadian lynx shown in Figure 10.1a have often been held
to epitomize predator–prey cycles. Recently, however, evidencehas increasingly indicated that even this apparent exemplar is notas straightforward as it has seemed. Experimental manipulations
carried out in the ﬁeld are one powerful means of suggesting whatforces are normally acting: if those forces are removed or exag-gerated, is the cycle eliminated or enhanced? A whole series ofcoordinated ﬁeld experiments has indicated that the cyclic hareis not simply a prey of the lynx (and other predators in the com-munity), nor simply a predator of its plant food resources: thecycle can be understood only by taking account of its interactionsboth as a prey andas a predator (Krebs et al. , 2001). Furthermore,
modern statistical analysis of the time series of abundances has
tended to conﬁrm this: the hare series carries a relatively com-plex ‘signature’, suggesting the inﬂuence of both its predators andits food, whereas the lynx series has a simpler signature, suggestingonly the inﬂuence of its (hare) prey (Stenseth et al. , 1997; see also
Section 14.5.2). What has so often been described as a predator-prey cycle seems rather to comprise one predator linked to a speciesthat is both predator and prey.
Apparently coupled one-generation
cycles linking a moth host ( Plodia inter-
punctella ) and its parasitoid Venturia
canescens were shown in Figure 10.1c.
In this case, the dangers of jumping too readily to the conclusionthat these are predator–prey cycles are highlighted by the fact that
the host also exhibits generation-length cycles when maintainedalone, without any natural enemies, and also when maintainedwith another enemy, a granulovirus (Figure 10.5). It has been pos-sible, however, to conﬁrm that the cycles in Figure 10.1c are indeed
coupled oscillations, using methods similar to those applied to the hare–lynx time series (Bjørnstad et al. , 2001). The host-alone
cycles have within them the signature simply of intraspeciﬁccompetition, and the virus seems to modulate this pattern but doesnot alter its basic structure (i.e. the patterns in Figure 10.5 are not
predator–prey cycles). However, the host and parasitoid cyclesin Figure 10.1c both carry the same, more complex signature thatindicates a tightly coupled prey–predator interaction (see alsoSection 12.7.1).
We return to the question of cycles – indeed, some of the 
same cycles discussed above – in Section 14.6, as part of a more
general exploration of how the whole range of biotic and abioticfactors come together to determine the level and pattern of a population’s abundance.
10.3 Effects of crowding
The most obvious omission, perhaps, from the predator–prey inter-
actions we have modeled so far has been any acknowledgementthat prey abundance may be limited by other prey, and predator
•• ••One host generation
AC
BD
One parasitoid generation
or time taken from infection to
release of pathogen particles
0
TimePopulation size
Figure 10.4 Schematic illustration of how a parasitoid or pathogen may generate coupled cycles in abundance in the host and itself that
are approximately one host generation in length. For this, the parasitoid or pathogen must have a generation length approximate ly half
that of the host. Any chance increase in host abundance (A) will ﬁrst give rise to an increase in parasitoid abundance one para sitoid
generation later (B), and also to an increase in host abundance one host generation later (C). But the parasitoid peak at B wil l also give 
rise to a coincident host trough, which will give rise to a parasitoid trough at C, reinforcing the host peak at that point. Th is mutual
reinforcement will continue until by, say, D, persistent host generation-length cycles have become established. (After Knell, 1 998; from
Godfray & Hassell, 1989.)
moths and two
natural enemiesEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 303304 CHAPTER 10
abundance by other predators. Prey are bound to be increasingly
affected by intraspeciﬁc competition as their abundance increases;and predators, too, are likely to be limited at high densities by the availability of resting places, say, or safe refuges of theirown, quite apart from their interaction with their most obvious
resource, their prey.
More generally, predators have
been assumed in the models discussedthus far to consume prey at a rate that
depends only on prey abundance (in Equation 10.2, for example,the consumption rate per predator is simply aN). In reality, con-
sumption rate will also often depend on the abundance of the pred-ators themselves. Most obviously, food shortage – the abundanceof prey per predator – will commonly result in a reduction in the
consumption rate per individual as predator density increases.
However, even when food is not limited, the consumption ratecan be reduced by a number of processes known collectively asmutual interference (Hassell, 1978). For example, many consumersinteract behaviorally with other members of their population, leav-ing less time for feeding and therefore depressing the overall feed-ing rate. For instance, humming-birds actively and aggressivelydefend rich sources of nectar. Alternatively, an increase in consumerdensity may lead to an increased rate of emigration, or of consumers stealing food from one another (as do many gulls), 
or the prey themselves may respond to the presence of con-sumers and become less available for capture. All of these mechanisms give rise to a decline in predator consumption rate
with predator density. Figure 10.6a, for example, shows signi-ﬁcant reductions in consumption rate with abundance even at low densities of the crab Carcinus aestuarii foraging for the mus-
sel Musculista senhousia ; while Figure 10.6b shows that the kill 
rate of wolves, Canis lupus , preying on moose, Alces alces , in Isle
Royale National Park, Michigan, USA, was lowest when there weremost wolves.
10.3.1 Crowding in the Lotka–Volterra model
The effects of intraspeciﬁc competition, and of a decline in
predator consumption rate with predator density, can be invest-igated by modifying the Lotka–Volterra isoclines. The details ofincorporating intraspeciﬁc competition into the prey zero isoclineare described by Begon et al. (1990), but the end result (Fig-
ure 10.7a) can be understood without reference to these details.
At low prey densities there is no intraspeciﬁc competition, and theprey isocline is horizontal as in the Lotka–Volterra model. But asdensity increases, it is increasingly the case that prey densities belowthe isocline (prey increase) must be placed above the isocline (preydecrease) because of the effects of intraspeciﬁc competition.Hence, the isocline is increasingly lowered until it reaches the preyaxis at the carrying capacity, K
N; that is, the prey can only just
maintain themselves even in the absence of predators.
As we have seen, the predator isocline
in the Lotka–Volterra model is vertical.
This itself reﬂects the assumption that
the ability of a predator population toincrease in abundance is determinedby the absolute abundance of prey, irrespective of the number ofpredators. If, however, mutual interference amongst the pred-ators increases, then individual consumption rates will decline with predator abundance, and additional prey will be required tomaintain a predator population of any given size. The predatorzero isocline will depart increasingly from the vertical (Figure 10.7b).Moreover, at high densities, competition for other resources will
put an upper limit on the predator population (a horizontal iso-cline) irrespective of prey numbers (Figure 10.7b).
An alternative modiﬁcation is to
abandon altogether the assumption thatconsumption rate depends only on theabsolute availability of prey, and assumeratio-dependent predation instead (Arditi & Ginzburg, 1989),although this alternative has itself been criticized (see Abrams, 1997;Vucetich et al. , 2002). In this case, the consumption rate depends
on the ratio of prey to predators, and a particular ratio needs to be exceeded for the predators to increase in abundance: a 
•• ••Log (number)
90 30 1000123
20(a)
40 50 60 70 80Log (number)
90 3000123
20
Time (weeks)(b)
40 50 60 70 80 10
Figure 10.5 Host generation-length cycles in the moth Plodia
interpunctella (a) alone (black line) and (b) with a granulovirus
(colored line). These dynamics may be compared with those 
in Figure 10.1c. In spite of a superﬁcial similarity in pattern,analysis indicates that those in (a) are generated by intraspeciﬁc
competition; those in (b) are simply modulated versions of those in (a) and are therefore not predator–prey cycles. However, those in Figure 10.1c are predator–prey cycles. (After Bjornstad et al. , 2001.)
mutual interferencecrowding and the
Lotka–Volterraisoclines
ratio-dependentpredationEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 304THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 305
diagonal zero isocline passing through the origin (Figure 10.7c).
Evidence of ratio-dependent predation is illustrated, for example,for the wolf–moose study in Figure 10.6c.
The likely effects of crowding in either population can now
be deduced by combining the predator and prey isoclines (Figure
10.7d). Oscillations are still apparent for the most part, but theseare no longer neutrally stable. Instead, they are damped so thatthey converge to a stable equilibrium. Predator–prey interac-tions in which either or both populations are substantially self-limited are likely, therefore, to exhibit patterns of abundance thatare relatively stable, i.e. in which ﬂuctuations in abundance arerelatively slight.
More particularly, when the pred-
ator is relatively inefﬁcient, i.e. when
many prey are needed to maintain apopulation of predators (curve (ii) in
Figure 10.7d), the oscillations are damped quickly but the equi-librium prey abundance ( N*) is not much less than the equilibrium
in the absence of predators ( K
N). By contrast, when the predators
are more efﬁcient (curve (i)), N*is lower and the equilibrium dens-
ity of predators, P*, is higher – but the interaction is less stable
(the oscillations are more persistent). Moreover, if the predators
are very strongly self-limited, then abundance may not oscillate
at all (curve (iii)); but P*will tend to be low, whilst N*will tend
to be not much less than KN. Hence, for interactions where there
is crowding, there appears to be a contrast between those in which
predator density is low, prey abundance is little affected and thepatterns of abundance are stable, and those in which predator density is higher and prey abundance is more drastically reduced,
but the patterns of abundance are less stable. (Figure 10.7d does not use ratio-dependent predation, but a predator isoclinewith a steeper slope in a ratio-dependent model (more efﬁcientpredation) can be equated, for present purposes, with an isoclinerising from closer to the origin in the ﬁgure – that is, curve (i)rather than curve (ii).)
Essentially similar conclusions emerge from modiﬁcations of
the Nicholson–Bailey model that incorporate either simple(logistic) crowding effects amongst the hosts or mutual interfer-ence amongst the predators (Hassell, 1978).
To quote examples of data proving the stabilizing inﬂuence
of self-limitation on predator–prey dynamics would be difﬁcult,
simply because it would be all but impossible to compare thedynamics of matched populations with and without such self-limitation. On the other hand, populations of predators and prey with relatively stable dynamics are commonplace, as are the stabilizing forces of self-limitation we have discussed here. To takea more speciﬁc example, there are two groups of primarily her-bivorous rodents that are widespread in the Arctic: the microtinerodents (lemmings and voles) and the ground squirrels. The
microtines are renowned for their dramatic, cyclic ﬂuctuations 
in abundance (see Chapter 14), but the ground squirrels have 
populations that remain remarkably constant from year to year,
especially in open meadow and tundra habitats. There, signiﬁc-
antly, they appear to be strongly self-limited by food availability,suitable burrowing habitat and their own spacing behavior
(Karels & Boonstra, 2000).
•• ••
Mussels eaten
per crab40
20
0
Mussel density200 100(a)
1 crab
2 crabs
4 crabsKill rate
(kills wolf–1 month–1)2.5
0.00.51.01.52.0
Moose : wolf ratio200 0 50 100 150(c)
Number of wolves [wolves 1000  km–2]Kill rate
(kills wolf–1 month–1)2.5
0.00.51.01.52.0
50 40 30 20 10 0(b)
[92] [74] [55] [37] [18]Figure 10.6 (a) Mutual interference
amongst crabs, Carcinus aestuarii , feeding
on mussels, Musculista senhousia . /H170041 crab;
/H17039, 2 crabs; /H17009, 4 crabs. The more crabs 
there were, the lower their per capita
consumption rate. (After Mistri, 2003.) (b) Mutual interference amongst wolves,Canis lupus , preying on moose, Alces alces .
(c) The same data but with wolf kill rate
plotted against the moose : wolf ratio. Theﬁtted curve assumes a dependence of killrate on this ratio, but also that the wolvesmay become ‘saturated’ at high moosedensities (see Section 10.4.2). This curveﬁts better than any for which kill ratedepends on either predator density (e.g.(b)) or prey density. ((b, c) after Vucetich
et al. , 2002.)
crowding stabilizes
dynamicsEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 305306 CHAPTER 10
•• ••(d)
NP
N(i)*(i)
P(i)*
P
N *N(ii)(ii)
*P(ii)
P
N *N(iii)(iii) *P(iii)N(iii)
TimeP(ii)
TimeN
PTime(i)
NP(a)
KNPredator abundance (P )
Prey density ( N)(b)
P
N
(c)
NP
Figure 10.7 (a) A prey zero isocline subject to crowding. At the lowest prey densities this is the same as the Lotka–Volterra isocline, but
when the density reaches the carrying capacity ( KN) the population can only just maintain itself even in the complete absence of predators.
(b) A predator zero isocline subject to crowding (see text). (c) A predator zero isocline when there is prey : predator ratio dep endent
predation. (d) The prey zero isocline combined with the predator zero isoclines with increasing levels of crowding: (i), (ii) a nd (iii). 
P*is the equilibrium abundance of predators, and N*the equilibrium abundance of prey. Combination (i) is the least stable (most
persistent oscillations) and has the most predators and least prey: the predators are relatively efﬁcient. Less efﬁcient predat ors, as in 
(ii), give rise to a lowered predator abundance, an increased prey abundance and less persistent oscillations. Strong predator self-limitation
(iii) can eliminate oscillations altogether, but P*is low and N*is close to KN.EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 306THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 307
On a cautionary note, however,
Umbanhowar et al. (2003), for example,
failed to ﬁnd evidence of mutual inter-
ference in a ﬁeld study of the parasitoidTachinomyia similis attacking its moth
host Orgyia vetusta . The strength of mutual interference may often
have been exaggerated by forcing predators to forage in artiﬁcial
arenas at densities much higher than those they experience naturally. This is a useful reminder of the general point that anecological force that is powerful in models or in the laboratorymay none the less often be trivial, in practice, in natural popula-tions. There can be little doubt, though, that self-limitation in itsvarious forms frequently plays a key role in shaping predator–prey dynamics.
10.4 Functional responses
Having examined the relationship between a predator’s con-
sumption rate and the predator’s own abundance, above, we turn now to the effect on this consumption rate of the prey’s abundance, the so-called functional response (Solomon, 1949).Below we describe the three main types of functional response
(Holling, 1959), before considering how they might modifypredator–prey dynamics.
10.4.1 The type 1 functional response
The most basic, ‘type 1’ functional response is that assumed by
the Lotka–Volterra equations: consumption rate rises linearly withprey density (indicated by the constant, a, in Equation 10.2). An
example is illustrated in Figure 10.8. The rate at which Daphnia
magna consumed yeast cells rose linearly when the density of cellsvaried, because the yeast cells were extracted by the Daphnia from
a constant volume of water washed over their ﬁltering apparatus,
and the amount extracted therefore rose in line with food con-
centration. Above 10
5cells ml−1, however, the Daphnia could ﬁlter
more cells but were unable to swallow all the food they ﬁltered. They
therefore ingested food at a maximum (plateau) rate irrespectiveof its concentration.
10.4.2 The type 2 functional response
The most frequently observed functional response is the ‘type 2’response, in which consumption rate rises with prey density, but gradually decelerates until a plateau is reached at which consumption rate remains constant irrespective of prey density.(Realistically, even a type 1 response must have a plateau, as in
the example above. The distinction is between the decelerationof a type 2 response and the linearity of the type 1 response.) Type 2 responses are shown for a carnivore, a herbivore and aparasitoid in Figure 10.9.
•• ••
Feeding rate
(cells × 105 h–1)
1004
22
3459
Food cells ( × 105 ml–1)
Figure 10.8 The type 1 functional response of Daphnia magna
to different concentrations of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . 
(After Rigler, 1961.)how important is
mutual interferencein practice?
Number eaten during the
experiment
01020
40 80
Prey density0(a)
 Intake (g min–2)
030
150 250
Biomass (g m–2)0 100 200 5040
20
10
00.20.4
0.5 2
Number of hosts available per m20(b) (c)
1 1.5Number of hosts
parasitized per m2
0.30.5
0.1
Figure 10.9 Type 2 functional responses. (a) Tenth-instar damselﬂy nymphs ( Ishnura elegans ) eating Daphnia of approximately constant
size. (After Thompson, 1975.) (b) Wood bison ( Bison bison ) feeding on the sedge Carex atherodes presented at a range of sedge biomass
densities. (After Bergman et al. , 2000.) (c) The parasitoid Microplitis croceipes attacking the tobacco budworm Heliothis virescens . (After
Tillman, 1996.)EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 307••308 CHAPTER 10
The type 2 response can be expl-
ained by noting that a predator has to
devote a certain handling time to each
prey item it consumes (i.e. pursuing, subduing and consuming the prey item, and then preparing itself for further search). As 
prey density increases, ﬁnding prey becomes increasingly easy.Handling a prey item, however, still takes the same length of time,and handling overall therefore takes up an increasing proportionof the predator’s time – until at high prey densities the predatoris effectively spending all of its time handling prey. The con-sumption rate therefore approaches and then reaches a maximum(the plateau), determined by the maximum number of handlingtimes that can be ﬁtted into the total time available.
We can derive a relationship between P
e(the number of 
prey items eaten by a predator during a period of searching 
time, Ts) and N, the density of those prey items (Holling, 1959).
Peincreases with the time available for searching, it increases with
prey density, and it increases with the searching efﬁciency or attackrate of the predator, a. Thus:
P
e=aTsN. (10.16)
However, the time available for searching will be less than the
total time, T, because of time spent handling prey. Hence, if Th
is the handling time of each prey item, then ThPeis the total time
spent handling prey, and:
Ts=T−ThPe. (10.17)
Substituting this into Equation 10.16 we have:
Pe=a(T−ThPe)N (10.18)
or, rearranging:
Pe=aNT/1+aThN. (10.19)
Note that the equation describes the amount eaten during 
a speciﬁed period of time, T, and that the density of prey, N, is
assumed to remain constant throughout that period. In experi-
ments, this can sometimes be guaranteed by replacing any preythat are eaten, but more sophisticated models are required if preydensity is depleted by the predator. Such models are describedby Hassell (1978), who also discusses methods of estimating attackrates and handling times from a set of data. (Trexler et al. , 1988,
discuss the general problem of ﬁtting functional response curvesto sets of data.)
It would be wrong, however, to
imagine that the existence of a hand-
ling time is the only or the completeexplanation for all type 2 functionalresponses. For instance, if the prey are of variable proﬁtability,
then at high densities the diet may tend towards a decelerat-ing number of highly proﬁtable items (Krebs et al. , 1983); or a 
predator may become confused and less efﬁcient at high prey densities.
10.4.3 The type 3 functional response
Type 3 functional responses are illustrated in Figure 10.10a–c. 
At high prey densities they are similar to a type 2 response, andthe explanations for the two are the same. At low prey densities,however, the type 3 response has an accelerating phase where anincrease in density leads to a more than linear increase in con-
sumption rate. Overall, therefore, a type 3 response is ‘S-shaped’or ‘sigmoidal’.
One important way in which a type
3 response can be generated is throughswitching by the predator (see Section 9.5.2). The similaritiesbetween Figures 9.15 and 10.10 are readily apparent. The differ-ence is that discussions of switching focus on the density of a preytype relative to the densities of alternatives, whereas functionalresponses are based on only the absolute density of a single prey
type. In practice, though, absolute and relative densities are likelyto be closely correlated, and switching is therefore likely to leadfrequently to a type 3 functional response.
More generally, a type 3 functional
response will arise whenever anincrease in food density leads to anincrease in the consumer’s searchingefﬁciency, a, or a decrease in its handling
time, T
h, since between them these two determine consumption
rate (Equation 10.19). Thus, the small mammals in Figure 10.10a
appear to develop a search image for sawﬂy cocoons as theybecome more abundant (increasing efﬁciency). The bluebottle ﬂy, Calliphora vomitoria (Figure 10.10b), spends an increasing 
proportion of its time searching for ‘prey’ as prey density
increases (Figure 10.10d), also increasing efﬁciency. Whilst the waspAphelinus thomsoni (Figure 10.10c) exhibits a reduction in mean
handling time as the density of its sycamore aphid prey increases(Figure 10.10e). In each case, a type 3 functional response is theresult.
10.4.4 Consequences for population dynamics of
functional responses and the Allee effect
Different types of functional response
have different effects on populationdynamics. A type 3 response means alow predation rate at low prey densities.In terms of isoclines, this means that
••Holling’s type 2
response equation
other routes to atype 2 responseswitching
variations insearching efﬁciencyor handling time
type 3 responsesstabilize but may be unimportant in practicethe type 2 responseand handling timeEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 308••THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 309
••(d)Time searching
floor of arena (%)50100
100 200 300 400
Sugar droplets per arena0(e)Mean handling time (h)0.20.4
24
Aphid density01 6 8(b)Number eaten2550100150
100 200 300 400
Sugar droplets per arena0
0(c)
10.0
16 24 32
Aphid density0 85.0
0.30.60.9
Proportion of aphids captured (  )Number of aphids captured (  )(a)Number of cocoons opened
per mammal per day80160240320
200 400 600 800 1000
Number of cocoons per acre (1000s)SorexBlarina
Peromyscus
prey at low densities can increase in abundance virtually irrespective
of predator density, and that the prey zero isocline will thereforerise vertically at low prey densities (Figure 10.11a). This could lendconsiderable stability to an interaction (Figure 10.11a, curve (i)),but for this the predator would have to be highly efﬁcient at low
prey densities (readily capable of maintaining itself ), which con-tradicts the whole idea of a type 3 response (ignoring prey at lowdensities). Hence, curve (ii) in Figure 10.11a is likely to apply, andthe stabilizing inﬂuence of the type 3 response may in practicebe of little importance.
On the other hand, if a predator has a type 3 response to one
particular type of prey because it switches its attacks amongst various prey types, then the population dynamics of the predatorwould be independent of the abundance of any particular prey
type, and the vertical position of its zero isocline would thereforebe the same at all prey densities. As Figure 10.11b shows, this can
lead potentially to the predators regulating the prey at a low andstable level of abundance.
An apparent example of this is 
provided by studies of vole cycles in
Europe (Hanski et al. , 1991; see also
Section 14.6.4). In subarctic FinnishLapland, there are regular 4- or 5-yearcycles, with a ratio of maximum : minimum vole densities gen-erally exceeding 100. In southern Sweden small rodents show no regular multiannual cycles. But between the two, moving north to south in Fennoscandia, there is a gradient of decreasingregularity, amplitude and length of the cycle. Hanski et al. argue
that this gradient is itself correlated with a gradient of increasing 
densities of generalist predators that switch between alternativeFigure 10.10 Type 3 (sigmoidal)
functional responses. (a) The shrews Sorex
and Blarina and the deer mouse Peromyscus
responding to changing ﬁeld densities of
cocoons of the European pine sawﬂy,
Neodiprion sertifer , in Ontario, Canada.
(After Holling, 1959.) (b) The bluebottleﬂy, Calliphora vomitoria , feeding on sugar
droplets. (After Murdie & Hassell, 1973.)(c) The wasp, Aphelinus thomsoni , attacking
sycamore aphids, Drepanosiphum platanoidis :
note the density-dependent increase in preymortality rate at low prey densities ( )giving rise to the accelerating phase of the
response curve ( ). (After Collins et al. ,
1981.) (d) The basis of the response in (b): searching efﬁciency of C. vomitoria
increases with ‘prey’ (sugar droplet)density. (After Murdie & Hassell, 1973.) (e) The basis of the response in (c):handling time in A. thomsoni decreases with
aphid density. (After Collins et al. , 1981.)
switching,
stabilization and the voles ofFennoscandiaEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 309310 CHAPTER 10
prey as relative densities change (especially red foxes, badgers,
domestic cats, buzzards, tawny owls and crows) and of specialistbird predators (especially other owl species and kestrels) that, beingwide ranging in their activity, switch between alternative areas.In both cases, predator dynamics would be effectively independ-
ent of vole abundance, adding stability to the system in the manner of Figure 10.11b. In fact, Hanski et al. were able to go
further in constructing a simple model of prey (voles) interactingwith specialist predators (mustelids: stoats and weasels) and generalist (switching) predators. Their general contention was supported; as the number of generalist predators increased, oscillations in vole and mustelid abundance (which may or may not be the basis for the vole cycle) decreased in length andamplitude. Large enough densities of switching generalists 
stabilized the cycle entirely.Turning to type 2 responses, if the
predator has a response that reaches its
plateau at relatively low prey densities(well below K
N), then the prey zero
isocline has a hump, because there is arange of intermediate prey densitieswhere the predators become lessefﬁcient with increasing prey density but the effects of competi-
tion amongst the prey are not intense. A hump will also arise here if the prey are subject to an ‘Allee effect’, where they havea disproportionately low rate of recruitment when their own density is low, perhaps because mates are difﬁcult to ﬁnd or becausea ‘critical number’ must be exceeded before a resource can be properly exploited, i.e. there is inverse density dependence at lowpopulation densities (Courchamp et al. , 1999). If the predator 
•• ••Predator abundance (P )
Prey abundance ( N)(a)
(ii)(i)
Time(i)
P
N
Time(ii)
PNPredator abundance (P )
Prey abundance ( N)(b)
TimeP
NAbundanceFigure 10.11 (a) The prey zero 
isocline is that which is appropriate 
when consumption rate is particularly low at low prey densities because of a type 3 functional response, an aggregative
response (and partial refuge), an actualrefuge or because of a reserve of plantmaterial that is not palatable. With arelatively inefﬁcient predator, predator zero isocline (ii) is appropriate and theoutcome is not dissimilar from Figure 10.7.However, a relatively efﬁcient predatorwill still be able to maintain itself at lowprey densities. Predator zero isocline (i)
will therefore be appropriate, leading to astable pattern of abundance in which preydensity is well below the carrying capacityand predator density is relatively high.(b) When a type 3 functional responsearises because the predator exhibitsswitching behavior, the predator’sabundance may be independent of thedensity of any particular prey type (mainﬁgure), and the predator zero isocline maytherefore be horizontal (unchanging withprey density). This can lead to a stablepattern of abundance (inset) with preydensity well below the carrying capacity.
type 2 responses 
and the Allee effectdestabilize – but not necessarily inpracticeEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 310THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 311
isocline crosses to the right of the hump, then the population
dynamics of the interaction will be little affected; but if the isocline crosses to the left of the hump, then the outcome willbe persistent rather than convergent oscillations, i.e. the inter-action will be destabilized (Figure 10.12).
However, for a type 2 response to have this effect, predators
would have to suffer serious reductions in their consumption rate
at prey densities far below those at which the prey themselvessuffer seriously from competition. This is unlikely. The potentiallydestabilizing effects of type 2 responses may also therefore be oflittle practical importance.
A destabilizing Allee effect has not apparently been established
for any ‘natural’ predator–prey interaction. On the other hand,when we ourselves are the predator (for example, with exploited
ﬁsheries populations), we frequently have the ability (i.e. the technology) to maintain effective predation at low prey densities. If the prey population also exhibits an Allee effect, then the combination of this and persistent predation may all too readilydrive a population towards extinction (Stephens & Sutherland, 1999;and see Section 15.3.5). That is, our isocline may cross that of theprey well to the left of their hump.
10.5 Heterogeneity, aggregation and 
spatial variation
Until now in this chapter, environmental heterogeneities, and the
variable responses of predators and prey to such heterogeneities– all of which we saw in the previous chapter to be common-place – have been ignored. We can ignore them no longer.
10.5.1 Aggregative responses to prey density
Because of the potential consequences for population dynamics,
ecologists have been particularly interested in patch preferenceswhere patches vary in the density of the
food or prey items they contain (seeSection 9.6). At one time it appeared, andwas widely believed, that: (i) predatorsgenerally spent most time in patches containing high densities ofprey (because these were the most proﬁtable patches); (ii) mostpredators were therefore to be found in such patches; and (iii) prey in those patches were therefore most vulnerable to pre-dation, whereas those in low-density patches were relatively pro-
tected and most likely to survive. Examples certainly exist to supportthe ﬁrst two of these propositions (see Figure 9.20a–d), demon-strating an ‘aggregative response’ by the predators that is directlydensity dependent (predators spending most time in patcheswith high densities of prey such that prey and predator densitiesare positively correlated). However, this is not always the case.Furthermore, contrary to the third proposition, reviews ofhost–parasitoid interactions (e.g. Pacala & Hassell, 1991) have shownthat prey (hosts) in high-density patches are not necessarily themost vulnerable to attack (direct density dependence): percent-age parasitism may also be inversely density dependent or den-sity independent between patches (see Figure 9.20e). Indeed, thereviews suggest that only around 50% of the studies examined
show evidence of density dependence, and in only around 50%of these is the density dependence direct, as opposed to inverse.None the less, despite this variation in pattern, it remains truethat the risk of predation often varies greatly between patches,and hence between individual prey.
Many herbivores also display a
marked tendency to aggregate, andmany plants show marked variation in their risk of being attacked. The 
cabbage aphid ( Brevicoryne brassicae )
forms aggregates at two separate levels (Way & Cammell, 1970).Nymphs quickly form large groups when isolated on the surfaceof a single leaf, and populations on a single plant tend to berestricted to particular leaves. When aphids attack only one leaf
•• ••
Predator density (P )
Prey density ( N) KNN
P
Time(i)
(ii)
NP
TimeFigure 10.12 The possible effects of a
prey isocline with a ‘hump’, either as a
result of a type 2 functional response or an Allee effect. (i) If the predator is highlyefﬁcient, with its isocline crossing to the
left of the hump, then the hump can bedestabilizing, leading to the persistentoscillations of a limit cycle (inset). (ii) But if the predator is less efﬁcient, crossing tothe right of the hump, then the hump has little effect on the dynamics: theoscillations converge (inset).
do predators
aggregate in high-density prey patches?
plants may beprotected by theaggregative responsesof herbivoresEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 311312 CHAPTER 10
of a four-leaved cabbage plant (as they do naturally), the other
three leaves survive; but if the same number of aphids are evenlyspread over the four leaves, then all four leaves are destroyed (Way & Cammell, 1970). The aggregative behavior of the her-bivores affords protection to the plant overall. But how might 
such heterogeneities inﬂuence the dynamics of predator–prey interactions?
10.5.2 Heterogeneity in the graphical model
We can start by incorporating into the
Lotka–Volterra isoclines some relat-ively simple types of heterogeneity.Suppose that a portion of the prey
population exists in a refuge: for example, shore snails packed 
into cracks in the cliff-face, away from marauding birds, or plantsthat maintain a reserve of material underground that cannot be grazed. In such cases, the prey zero isocline rises vertically at low prey densities (again, see Figure 10.11), since prey at lowdensities, hidden in their refuge, can increase in abundance irrespective of predator density.
Even if predators tend simply to ignore prey in low-density
patches, as we have seen in some aggregative responses (see Sec-tion 9.6), this comes close to those prey being in a refuge, in the
sense that the predators do not (rather than cannot) attack them.The prey may therefore be said to have a ‘partial refuge’, and thistime the prey isocline can be expected to rise almost vertically atlow prey abundances.
We saw above, when discussing type 3 functional responses,
that such isoclines have a tendency to stabilize interactions.Early analyses of both the Lotka–Volterra and the Nicholson–Bailey systems (and early editions of this textbook) agreed withthis conclusion: that spatial heterogeneities, and the responses ofpredators and prey to them, stabilize predator–prey dynamics, oftenat low prey densities (Beddington et al. , 1978). However, as we
shall see next, subsequent developments have shown that the effectsof heterogeneity are more complex than was previously supposed:
the effects of heterogeneity vary depending on the type of preda-tor, the type of heterogeneity, and so on.
10.5.3 Heterogeneity in the Nicholson–Bailey model
Most progress has been made in
untangling these effects in host–parasitoid systems. A good starting
point is the model constructed by May (1978), in which heignored precise details and argued simply that the distribution 
of host–parasitoid encounters was not random but aggregated.In particular, he assumed that this distribution could be describedby a particular statistical model, the negative binomial. In this case(in contrast to Section 10.2.3), the proportion of hosts not
encountered at all is given by:
(10.20)
where kis a measure of the degree of aggregation; maximal 
aggregation at k=0, but a random distribution (recovery of 
the Nicholson–Bailey model) at k=∞. If this is incorporated 
into the Nicholson–Bailey model (Equations 10.14 and 10.15), thenwe have:
(10.21)
(10.22)
The behavior of a version of this
model, which also includes a density-
dependent host rate of increase, isillustrated in Figure 10.13, from which it is clear that the systemis given a marked boost in stability by the incorporation ofsigniﬁcant levels of aggregation ( k≤1). Of particular importance
is the existence of stable systems with low values of H*/K; i.e. 
aggregation appears capable of generating stable host abund-ances well below the host’s normal carrying capacity. This coincideswith the conclusion drawn from Figure 10.11.
10.5.4 Aggregation of risk and spatial density
dependence
How does this stability arise out of
aggregation? The answer lies in what hasbeen called ‘pseudo-interference’ (Free et al. , 1977). With mutual
interference, as predator density increases, predators spend anincreasing amount of time interacting with one another, and their
attack rate therefore declines. With pseudo-interference, attack ratealso declines with parasitoid density, but as a result of an increas-ing fraction of encounters being wasted on hosts that havealready been attacked. The crucial point is that ‘aggregation ofrisk’ amongst hosts tends to increase the amount of pseudo-interference. At low parasitoid densities, a parasitoid is unlikelyto have its attack rate reduced as a result of aggregation. But athigher parasitoid densities, parasitoids in aggregations (where mostof them are) will increasingly be faced with host patches in which
most or all of the hosts have already been parasitized. As para-sitoid density increases, therefore, their effective attack rate (andhence their subsequent birth rate) declines rapidly – a directly 
density-dependent effect. This dampens both the natural oscilla-tions in parasitoid density, and their impact on host mortality.PHAP
ktttk
+−
=− +⎡
⎣⎢⎤
⎦⎥⎧
⎨⎪
⎩⎪⎫
⎬⎪
⎭⎪1 11       .  HHAP
kttr tk
+−
=+⎡
⎣⎢⎤
⎦⎥ 1 1     e  pAP
ktk
0 1    =+⎡
⎣⎢⎤
⎦⎥−
•• ••refuges, partial
refuges and verticalisoclines
negative binomialencounters . . .. . . that stabilizedynamics
pseudo-interferenceEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 312THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 313
To summarize, aggregation of risk
stabilizes host–parasitoid interactions
by strengthening direct (not delayed)density dependencies that already exist(Taylor, 1993). The stabilizing powers
of this spatial phenomenon, aggregation of risk, therefore arise
not from any spatial density dependencies, but from its transla-
tion into direct, temporal density dependence.
But how does aggregation of risk relate to the aggregative
responses of parasitoids? And do aggregative responses andaggregation of risk necessarily lead to enhanced stability? We can address these questions by examining Figure 10.14, bearingin mind from Section 9.6 that aggregated predators do not necessarily spend most time foraging in patches of high host 
density (spatial density dependence); foraging time can also be 
negatively correlated with host density (inverse density dependence)
or independent of host density. Start with Figure 10.14a. The distribution of parasitoids over host patches follows a perfect,straight line density-dependent relationship. But, since the host :parasitoid ratio is therefore the same in each host patch, the riskis likely to be the same in each host patch, too. Thus, positivespatial density dependence does not necessarily lead to aggrega-tion of risk and does not necessarily enhance stability. On the other hand, with a directly density-dependent relationship that accelerates (Figure 10.14b), there does appear to be aggrega-
tion of risk, and this might well enhance stability (Hassell & May, 1973); but it turns out that whether or not it does so dependson the parasitoids’ functional response (Ives, 1992a). With a type1 response, assumed by most analyses, stability is enhanced. 
But with a more realistic type 2 response, initial increases in density-dependent aggregation from zero aggregation actuallydecrease aggregation of risk and are destabilizing. Only high levels of density-dependent aggregation are stabilizing.
Moreover, it is clear from Fig-
ures 10.14c and d that there can beconsiderable aggregation of risk witheither inverse spatial density depend-ence or no spatial density dependence
of any sort – and these would not be counteracted by a type 2functional response. In partial answer to our two questionsabove, therefore, aggregative responses that are spatially densitydependent are actually least likely to lead to aggregation of risk,
and therefore least likely to enhance stability.
In practice, of course, with real sets of data (like those in 
Figure 9.20), aggregation of risk will often arise from a com-bination of spatially density-dependent (direct or inverse) and density-independent responses (Chesson & Murdoch, 1986;Pacala & Hassell, 1991). Pacala, Hassell and coworkers have
•• ••(a)
20.6
46 00.21.0
q(b)
20.6
46 00.21.0
(c)
20.6
46 00.21.0
q(d)
20.6
46 00.21.0
Prey rate increase ( r)Figure 10.13 May’s (1978) model of
host–parasitoid aggregation, with host 
self-limitation incorporated, illustrates thataggregation can enhance stability and giverise to stability at low values of q=H*/K.
In the solid orange area there is an
exponential approach to equilibrium; in the hatched area there is an oscillatoryapproach to equilibrium; outside thesethere is instability (the oscillations eitherdiverge or are sustained). The four ﬁguresare for four values of k, the exponent of
the negative binomial distribution in themodel: (a) k=∞: no aggregation, least
stability; (b) k=2; (c) k=1; (d) k=0.1:
most aggregation. (After Hassell, 1978.)
aggregation of risk
strengthens direct(temporal) densitydependences
aggregative responsesand aggregation ofriskEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 313314 CHAPTER 10
called the former the ‘host density dependent’ (HDD) component,
and the latter the ‘host density independent’ (HDI) component,and have described methods by which, in real data sets likeFigure 9.20, the aggregation of risk can be split between them.Interestingly, in an analysis of 65 data sets, representing 26 
different host–parasitoid combinations (Pacala & Hassell, 1991),18 appeared to have sufﬁcient aggregation of risk to stabilize theirinteractions, but for 14 of these 18 cases, it was HDI variationthat contributed most to the total, further weakening any ima-gined link between spatial density dependence and stability.
10.5.5 Heterogeneity in some continuous-time models
We have been pursuing parasitoids and hosts; and in doing so 
we have been retaining certain structural features in our analysisthat we should now reconsider. In particular, our parasitoids havebeen assumed, in effect, to arrange themselves over host patchesat the beginning of a generation (or whatever the time interval
is between tand t+1), and then to have to suffer the consequences
of that arrangement until the beginning of the next generation.But suppose we move into continuous time – as appropriate formany parasitoids as it is for many other predators. Now, aggre-gation should be assumed to occur on a continuous basis, too.Predators in a depleted, or even a depleting, patch should leaveand redistribute themselves (see Section 9.6.2). The whole basis
of pseudo-interference and hence stability, namely wasted pred-
ator attacks in high predator density patches, tends to disappear.
Murdoch and Stewart-Oaten (1989)
went to, perhaps, the opposite extremeto the one we have been considering, byconstructing a continuous-time modelin which prey moved instantly intopatches to replace prey that had been consumed, and predatorsmoved instantly into patches to maintain a consistent pattern of predator–prey covariation over space. The effects on their 
otherwise neutrally stable Lotka–Volterra model contrast stronglywith those we have seen previously. First, predator aggregationthat is independent of local prey density now has noeffect on either
stability or prey density. However, predator aggregation that is directly dependent on local prey density has an effect that dependson the strength of this dependence – although it always lowersprey density (because predator efﬁciency is increased). If such density dependence is relatively weak (as Murdoch and Stewart-
Oaten argue it usually is in practice), then stability is decreased.
Only if it is stronger than seems typical in nature is stabilityincreased.
Other, less ‘extreme’ continuous-time formulations (Ives,
1992b), or those that combine discrete generations with redistri-bution within generations (Rohani et al. , 1994), produce results
•• ••Parasitoid density in a patch
Host density in a patch(c)
Host density in a patch(d)Parasitoid density in a patch(a) (b)Figure 10.14 The aggregative responses
of parasitoids and the aggregation of risk.
(a) Parasitoids aggregate in high host-density patches, but the parasitoid : hostratio is the same in all patches (a perfect
straight-line relationship), and hence therisk to hosts is apparently the same in allpatches. (b) Parasitoid aggregation to highhost-density patches now accelerates withincreasing host density, and hosts in high-density patches are thus apparently atgreater risk of parasitization: there isaggregation of risk. (c) With perfect inverse density dependence (i.e. parasitoid
aggregation in lowhost-density patches) 
the hosts in the low-density patches areapparently at a much greater risk ofparasitization: again there is aggregation ofrisk. (d) Even with no aggregative response(density independence) the hosts in somepatches are apparently at a greater risk of parasitization (are subject to a higherparasitoid : host ratio) than others: here too there is aggregation of risk.
continuous
redistribution ofpredators and preyEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 314THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 315
that are themselves intermediate between the ‘Nicholson–Bailey
extreme’ and the ‘Murdoch–Stewart-Oaten extreme’. It seems certain, however, that a preoccupation with models lackingwithin-generation movement has, in the past, led to a serious over-estimation of the signiﬁcance of aggregation to patches of high
host density in stabilizing host–parasitoid interactions.
10.5.6 The metapopulation perspective
The continuous- and discrete-time approaches clearly differ, but
they share a common perspective in seeing predator–prey inter-actions occurring within single populations, albeit populations withinbuilt variability. An alternative is a ‘metapopulation’ perspect-ive (see Section 6.9), in which environmental patches support 
subpopulations that have their own internal dynamics, but arelinked to other subpopulations by movement between patches.
A number of studies have investigated predator–prey meta-
population models, usually with unstable dynamics within patches.Mathematical difﬁculties have often limited analysis to two-patchmodels, where, if the patches are the same, and dispersal is uni-form, stability is unaffected: patchiness and dispersal have no effectin their own right (Murdoch et al. , 1992; Holt & Hassell, 1993).
Differences between the patches,
however, tend, in themselves, to stabilize
the interaction (Ives, 1992b; Murdoch et al. , 1992; Holt & Hassell, 1993). The
reason is that any difference in para-
meter values between patches leads to asynchrony in the ﬂuctu-ations in the patches. Inevitably, therefore, a population at thepeak of its cycle tends to lose more by dispersal than it gains, apopulation at a trough tends to gain more than it loses, and soon. Dispersal and asynchrony together, therefore, give rise to stab-
ilizing temporal density dependence in net migration rates.
The situation becomes much more complex with the inclu-
sion of aggregative behavior, since dispersal rates themselvesbecome a much more complex function of both prey and predator densities. Aggregation appears to have two opposing effects (Murdoch et al. , 1992). It tends to increase the asynchrony
between ﬂuctuations in predator abundance (enhancing stability)
but to reduce the asynchrony between prey ﬂuctuations (decreas-ing stability). The balance between these forces appears to be sensitive to the strength of the aggregation, but perhaps even moresensitive to the assumptions built into the models (Godfray & Pacala, 1992; Ives, 1992b; Murdoch et al. , 1992). Aggregation
may either stabilize or destabilize. In contrast to previous ana-lyses, it has no clear effect on prey density since its stabilizing 
powers are not linked to predator efﬁciency.
The treatment of a spatially hetero-
geneous predator–prey interaction as aproblem in metapopulation dynamicswas taken a stage further by Comins et al. (1992). They constructed computer
models of an environment consisting of a patchwork of squares,which could actually be visualized as such (Figure 10.15). In 
each generation, two processes occurred in sequence. First, a fraction, µ
P, of predators, and a fraction, µN, of prey, dispersed
from each square to the eight neighboring squares. At the same
time, predators and prey from the eight neighboring squareswere dispersing into the ﬁrst square. Thus, for example, thedynamics for the density of prey, N
i,t+1, in square iin generation
t+1, was given by:
Ni,t+1=Ni,t(1−µN)+µNLi,t (10.23)
•• ••patch differences
stabilize throughasynchronyan explicitly, andvisually, spatialmodel
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 10.15 Instantaneous maps of population density for simulations of the dispersal model of Comins et al. (1992) with
Nicholson–Bailey local dynamics. Different levels of shading represent different densities of hosts and parasitoids. Black squa res represent
empty patches; dark shades becoming paler represent patches with increasing host densities; light shades to white represent pat ches 
with hosts and increasing parasitoid densities. (a) Spirals: µN=1, µP=0.89; (b) spatial chaos: µi=0.2, µP=0.89; (c) a ‘crystalline lattice’: 
µN=0.05; µP=1. (After Comins et al. , 1992.)EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 315•• ••or:
Ni,t+1=Ni,t+µN(Li,t−Ni,t), (10.24)
where Li,tis the mean density in the eight squares neighboring
square iin generation t. The second phase then consisted of one
generation of standard predator–prey dynamics, either following
the Nicholson–Bailey equations or a discrete-time version of theLotka–Volterra equations (May, 1973). Simulations were started
with random prey and predator populations in a single patch, withall the other patches empty.
We know that within individual squares, if they existed in 
isolation, the dynamics would be unstable. But within the patch-work of squares as a whole, stable or at least highly persistentpatterns can readily be generated (Figure 10.15). The general message is similar to the results that we have already seen: thatstability can be generated by dispersal in metapopulations inwhich different patches are ﬂuctuating asynchronously. Note
especially, in this case, that a patch experiences a net gain inmigrants when its density is lower than the mean of the eightpatches with which it connects (Equation 10.24) but experiencesa net loss when its density is higher – a kind of density depend-ence. Note, too, that the asynchrony arises in the present casebecause the population has spread from a single initial patch (allpatches are, in principle, the same) and that it is maintained bydispersal being limited to the neighboring patches (rather than beinga powerful equalizing force over all patches).
Moreover, the explicitly spatial
aspects of this model have, quite liter-ally, added another dimension to theresults. Depending on the dispersal
fractions and the host reproductive rate, a number of quite dif-
ferent spatial structures can be generated (although they tend to blur into one another) (Figure 10.15a–c). ‘Spatial chaos’ can occur, in which a complex set of interacting wave fronts are estab-lished, each one persisting only brieﬂy. With somewhat differentparameter values, and especially when both predator and prey arehighly mobile, the patterns are more structured than chaotic, with‘spiral waves’ rotating around almost immobile focal points. Themodel, therefore, makes the point very graphically that persistenceat the level of a whole population does not necessarily imply eitheruniformity across the population or stability in individual partsof it. Static ‘crystalline lattices’ can even occur within a narrowrange of parameter values, with highly mobile predators and rathersedentary prey, emphasizing that pattern can be generated inter-nally within a population even in an intrinsically homogeneousenvironment.
Is there one general message that can be taken from this 
body of theory? Certainly, we cannot say ‘aggregation does this
orthatto predator–prey interactions’. Rather, aggregation can have
a variety of effects, and knowing which of these is likely will requiredetailed knowledge of predator and prey biology for the inter-action concerned. In particular, the effects of aggregation have
been seen to depend on the predator’s functional response, theextent of host self-regulation, and so on −other features that we
have examined in isolation. It is necessary, as stressed at the begin-ning of this chapter, in seeking to understand complex processes,to isolate conceptually the different components. But it is also necessary, ultimately, to recombine those components.
10.5.7 Aggregation, heterogeneity and spatial 
variation in practice
What, then, can be said about the role of spatial variation in practice? The stabilizing effects of heterogeneity were demonstratedfamously, long ago, by Huffaker (1958; Huffaker et al. , 1963), who
studied a system in which a predatory mite fed on a herbivorousmite, which fed on oranges interspersed amongst rubber balls 
in a tray. In the absence of its predator, the prey maintained aﬂuctuating but persistent population (Figure 10.16a); but if thepredator was added during the early stages of prey populationgrowth, it rapidly increased its own population size, consumedall of its prey and then became extinct itself (Figure 10.16b). The interaction was altered, however, when Huffaker made hismicrocosm more ‘patchy’ (creating, effectively, a metapopulation,though the term had not been coined at the time). He spread theoranges further apart, and partially isolated each one by placing
a complex arrangement of vaseline barriers in the tray, which the mites could not cross. But he facilitated the dispersal of the prey by inserting a number of upright sticks from which theycould launch themselves on silken strands carried by air currents.Dispersal between patches was therefore much easier for the preythan it was for the predators. In a patch occupied by both pred-ators and prey, the predators consumed all the prey and then either became extinct themselves or dispersed (with a low rateof success) to a new patch. But in patches occupied by prey alone,there was rapid, unhampered growth accompanied by successfuldispersal to new patches. In a patch occupied by predators alone, there was usually death of the predators before their foodarrived. Each patch was therefore ultimately doomed to the
extinction of both predators and prey. But overall, at any one time, there was a mosaic of unoccupied patches, prey–predatorpatches heading for extinction, and thriving prey patches; and thismosaic was capable of maintaining persistent populations ofboth predators and prey (Figure 10.16c).
Subsequently, others, too, have
demonstrated the power of a meta-population structure in promoting thepersistence of coupled predator andprey populations when their dynamicsin individual subpopulations are unstable. Figure 10.17a, forexample, shows this for a parasitoid attacking its beetle host. Fig-ure 10.17b shows similar results for prey and predatory ciliates316 CHAPTER 10
emergent spatial
patterns
metapopulationeffects in mites,beetles and ciliatesEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 316•• ••(a)
4
Time (days)02
20 60 100(b)
4
02
20 6004080Prey population (x 103)
40 80 1202Prey population (x 103)
160 200040
0(c)
Predator population Predator population
Typhlodromus Eotetranychus
Figure 10.16 Hide and seek:
predator–prey interactions between the
mite Eotetranychus sexmaculatus and its
predator, the mite Typhlodromus occidentalis .
(a) Population ﬂuctuations of Eotetranychus
without its predator. (b) A single oscillation
of the predator and prey in a simplesystem. (c) Sustained oscillations in a morecomplex system. (After Huffaker, 1958.)
Persistence time (weeks)
0102030
Treatment(a)
51525
Arraysc
750b
270b
180b,c
30aPersistence time (days)
0120
Microcosm volume (ml)(b)
80
40
1 cell 4-cell meta-
population49-cell meta-
population4-cell
undivided49-cell
undivided
Figure 10.17 A metapopulation structure can increase the persistence of predator–prey interactions. (a) The parasitoid, Anisopteromalus
calandrae , attacking its bruchid beetle host, Callosobruchus chinensis , living on beans either in small single ‘cells’ (short persistence time, left),
or in combinations of cells (four or 49), which either had free access between them so that they effectively constituted a sing le population
(persistence time not signiﬁcantly increased, right), or had limited (infrequent) movement between cells so that they constitut ed a
metapopulation of separate subpopulations (increased persistence time, center). Bars show standard errors. (After Bonsall et al. , 2002.) 
(b) The predatory ciliate, Didinium nasutum , feeding on the bacterivorous ciliate, Colpidium striatum , in bottles of various volumes, where
persistence time varied little, except in the smallest populations (30 ml) where times were shorter, and also in ‘arrays’ of nin e or 25 linked
30 ml bottles (metapopulations), where persistence was greatly prolonged: all populations persisted until the end of the experim ent 
(130 days). Bars show standard errors; different letters above bars indicate treatments that were signiﬁcantly different from o ne another 
(P<0.05). (After Holyoak & Lawler, 1996.)EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 317318 CHAPTER 10
(protists), where, in support of the role of a metapopulation
structure, it was also possible to demonstrate asynchrony in thedynamics of individual subpopulations and frequent local preyextinctions and recolonizations (Holyoak & Lawler, 1996).
A study providing support for the 
stabilizing powers of a physical refuge
is illustrated in Figure 10.18, based on
the same Plodia –Venturia host–parasitoid system as that in Figure
10.1c. In this case, hosts living deeper in their food are beyondthe reach of the parasitoids attempting to lay their eggs in them.In the absence of this refuge, in a shallow food medium, this host–parasitoid interaction is unable to persist (Figure 10.18c), althoughthe host alone does so readily (Figure 10.18d). With a refuge pre-sent, however, in a deeper food medium, the host and parasitoid
can apparently persist together indeﬁnitely (Figure 10.18a).
In fact, though, the distinctions
between different types of spatial heterogeneity may not be as clear cutin real systems as they are in math-ematical models. Ellner et al. (2001),
for example, examined a system of predatory mites, Phytoseiuluspersimilis , feeding on herbivorous mites, Tetranychus urticae , feed-
ing on bean plants, Phaseolus lunatus . On individual plants and on
a single ‘continent’ of 90 plants (Figure 10.19a), the system had 
no long-term persistence (Figure 10.19c). However, when theStyrofoam sheet supporting the plants was split into eight islands
of 10 plants, connected by bridges that limited the mites’ powersof dispersal (Figure 10.19b), persistence was apparently indeﬁnite(Figure 10.19d, e). It would be easy to jump to the conclusionthat stability was increased by the eight-island metapopulation structure. But when Ellner et al. examined mathematical models
of the system that allowed the various aspects of the altered layout to be investigated one by one, they could detect no signi-ﬁcant effect of such a structure. Instead, they suggested that theenhanced stability arose from a different aspect: a reduction in
the predators’ ability to detect and respond to prey outbreaks on individual plants – a prey ‘refuge’ effect that could arise in theabsence of any explicit spatial structure.
One major problem in making pro-
nouncements about the stabilizing roleof aggregation of risk is that although,as we have seen, there have been wide-
•• ••(a)Log number of adults0.000.51.01.52.02.53.0
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400(b)
0.000.51.01.52.02.53.0
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400500
(a)
0.000.51.01.52.02.53.0
50 100 150 200 250 300(d)
0.000.51.01.52.02.53.0
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400500
Time (days)600 550 450Host
Parasitoid
Figure 10.18 Long-term population dynamics in laboratory population cages of a host ( Plodia interpunctella ), with and without its
parasitoid ( Venturia canescens ). (a) Host and parasitoid in deep medium, exhibiting coupled cycles in abundance, approximately one host
generation in length. (b) The host alone in deep medium, exhibiting similar cycles. (c) Host and parasitoid in shallow medium, unable to
persist. (d) The host alone in shallow medium, able to persist. The deep medium provides a refuge from attack for a proportion of the
host population that is not present in the shallow medium (see Section 10.5.2). All data sets are selected from several replica tes showing
the same pattern. (After Begon et al. , 1995.)
real data conﬁrm the
complexity of naturalsystemsa refuge for a moth
more mites: ametapopulation or a refuge?EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 318THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 319
ranging surveys of the data on spatial distributions of attacks, these
data generally come from studies of very short duration – oftenof only one generation. We do not know if the observed spatialpatterns are typical for that interaction; nor do we know if thepopulation dynamics show the degree of stability that the spatial
patterns might seem to predict. One investigation that has exam-ined population dynamics and spatial distributions over severalgenerations is that of Redfern et al. (1992), who made a 7-year
(seven-generation) study of two tephritid ﬂy species that attackthistles and the guilds of parasitoids that attack the ﬂies. For one host, Terellia serratulae (Figure 10.20a) there was evidence of
year-to-year density dependence in the overall rate of parasitism(Figure 10.20b), but no strong evidence of signiﬁcant levels of aggregation within generations, either overall (Figure 10.20c) 
or for parasitoid species individually. For the other species,Urophora stylata (Figure 10.20d), there was no apparent temporal
density dependence but good evidence for the aggregation of risk(Figure 10.20e, f ), and, to repeat a pattern we have seen before,most heterogeneity was contributed by the HDI component. Itcannot be said, however, that the patterns of this study ﬁt neatly,overall, to the theory we have outlined. First, both hosts were
attacked by several parasitoid species – not one, as assumed bymost models. Second, the levels of aggregation (and to a lesserextent the HDI or HDD contributions) varied considerably andapparently randomly from year to year (Figure 10.20c, f ): no one
year was typical, and no single ‘snap-shot’ could have capturedeither interaction. Finally, while the relatively stable dynamics ofTerellia may have reﬂected the more demonstrable direct density
dependence in parasitism, this appeared to be quite unconnectedto any differences in the aggregation of risk.
The effects of spatial hetero-
geneities on the stability of predator–prey dynamics are not only of purely scientiﬁc interest. They have also been
the subject of lively debate (Hawkins &Cornell, 1999) in considering the prop-erties and nature of biological control agents: natural enemies of a pest that are imported into an area, or otherwise aided andabetted, in order to control the pest (see Section 15.2.5). What is required of a good biological control agent is the ability to 
•• ••spatial heterogeneity
and the mosteffective biologicalcontrol agents40
Time (days)0 200 40030
020√(Number of adult mites)10
300 10040
Time (days)0 200 40030
020√(Number of adult mites)10
300 100(a) (b)
(d) (e)(c)
30
Time (days)0 50 100 15025
020√(Number of adult mites)51015
Figure 10.19 The population dynamics of the predatory mite, Phytoseiulus persimilis , and its herbivorous mite prey, Tetranychus urticae .
They interacted either (a) on a single continent of 90 bean plants, the dynamics of which are shown in (c) ( /H17009, predators; 7, prey), or 
(b) in a metapopulation of eight islands of 10 plants. For the latter, the dynamics of two replicates are shown in (d) and (e),  where
persistence (stability) is clearly enhanced. (After Ellner et al. , 2001.)EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 319320 CHAPTER 10
reduce the prey (pest) to a stable abundance well below its 
normal, harmful level, and we have seen that some theoreticalanalyses suggest that this is precisely what aggregative responseshelp to generate. Establishing such a link in practice, however,has not proved easy. Murdoch et al. (1995), for example, noted
that the California red scale, Aonidiella aurantii , an insect pest of
citrus plants worldwide, appeared to be kept at low and remark-
ably stable densities in southern California by a parasitoid intro-duced to control it, Aphytis mellitus . The existence of a partial refuge
from parasitization for the red scale seemed a plausible hypo-thesis for how this was achieved: on bark in the interior of thetrees, rates of parasitism were very low and scale densities high,
seemingly as a result of the activities of ants there that interferedwith the searching parasitoids. Murdoch et al. , therefore, tested
this hypothesis by a ﬁeld experiment in which ants were removedfrom a number of trees. Parasitization rates in the refuge did
increase, and scale abundance declined there (Figure 10.21), andthere was some evidence that parasitization rates, and scaleabundance, in the population as a whole were then more vari-able. But these effects were only slight and apparently shortterm, and there was certainly no evidence that scale abundanceoverall was increased by any diminution of the refuge effect.
•• ••Log (T. serratulae density + 1) (per head)00.30.6
0.4
0.2
0.1(a)
0.5
1986 1988
Year1982 1984Log (U. stylata density + 1) (per head)00.30.6
0.4
0.2
0.1(d)
0.5
1986 1988
Year1982 1984
Total parasitism (%)
03070
0.4 0.6
T. serratulae  density (per head)0 0.3 0.5 0.240
20
10(b)
60
50
0.11982
1986
198819831984
1987
1985
CV2
034
1986 1988
Year1982 1985 1987 19842
1(c)
1983Total parasitism (%)
01535
2.0 2.5
U. stylata  density (per head)0 1.5 1.020
10
5(e)
30
25
0.51983
198719851988198619821984
CV2
034
1986 1988
Year1982 1985 1987 19842
1(f)
1983
Figure 10.20 Attacks by parasitoids on tephrytid ﬂies ( Terellia serratulae and Urophora stylata ) that attack thistle ﬂower-heads. The
dynamics of the populations are shown for T. serratulae in (a) and for U. stylata in (d). Temporal density dependence of parasitoid 
attacks on T. serratulae (b) is signiﬁcant ( r2=0.75; P<0.05), but for U. stylata (e) it is not ( r2=0.44; P>0.05); both ﬁtted lines take the 
form y=a+blog10x. However, whereas for T. serratulae (c) there is little aggregation of risk of parasitoid attack within years (measured 
as CV2>1 for aggregation), with U. stylata (f ) there is far more, most of which is HDI (no shading) rather than HDD (dark shading).
(After Redfern et al. , 1992.)EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 320THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 321
Moreover, Murdoch et al. (1985) had earlier argued that, in gen-
eral, pest populations persist after successful biological control not
as a result of aggregative responses, but because of the stochasticcreation of host patches by colonization and their subsequent extinction when discovered by the agent: essentially, a metapop-
ulation effect. Waage and Greathead (1988), however, suggestedthat a broader perspective could incorporate both aggregativeresponses and metapopulation effects. They proposed that scaleinsects and other homopterans, and mites (like Huffaker’s), whichmay reproduce to have many generations within a patch, are oftenstabilized by asynchronies in the dynamics of different patches;whereas lepidopterans and hymenopterans, which typicallyoccupy a patch for only part of a single generation, may often bestabilized by an aggregative response. In fact, though, with bio-
logical control, like predator–prey dynamics generally, buildingconvincing links between patterns in population stability of naturalpopulations and particular stabilizing mechanisms – or combina-tions of mechanisms – remains a challenge for the future.10.6 Multiple equilibria: an explanation 
for outbreaks?
When predator and prey populations interact, there can some-
times be sudden changes in the abundance of one or both part-ners: outbreaks or crashes. Of course, this may reﬂect an equallysudden change in the environment, but ecologists working in avariety of ﬁelds have come to realize that there is not necessar-
ily just one equilibrium combination of a predator and prey(about which there may or may not be oscillations). There can,instead, be ‘multiple equilibria’ or ‘alternative stable states’.
Figure 10.22 is a model with multi-
ple equilibria. The prey zero isocline hasboth a vertical section at low densitiesand a hump. This could reﬂect a type3 functional response of a predator that also has a long handlingtime, or perhaps the combination of an aggregative response and
an Allee effect in the prey. As a consequence, the predator zero
•• ••a model with
multiple equilibriaJJA S O A M J S JA O D
1984 1985JJA S O A M J S JA O D
1984 198510
1(d)ExteriorFraction parasitized
00.30.7
0.4
0.2
0.10.50.6(c)Exterior00.30.4
0.2
0.1(a)Refuge
10
1(b)RefugeLog number per sampleFraction parasitized
Log number per sampleControl
Ant removal
Figure 10.21 Results of a ﬁeld experiment to test the hypothesis that the parasitoid Aphytis mellitus maintains the abundance of the
California red scale, Aonidiella aurantii , at stable low levels because of a partial refuge from parasitization in the interior portions of citrus
trees, where ants interfere with the parasitoids. When ants were removed from blocks of trees (time of removal indicated by the  arrow),
the fraction parasitized in the refuge tended to be higher (a), and scale abundance there was lower (b), but outside the refuge  (‘exterior’)
the fraction parasitized was only marginally more variable (c), and scale abundance was only more variable over one relatively brief period
and tended to be lower than on control trees (d). (After Murdoch et al. , 1995.)EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 321•• ••isocline crosses the prey zero isocline three times. The strengths
and directions of the arrows in Figure 10.22a indicate that twoof these points (X and Z) are fairly stable equilibria (although thereare oscillations around each). The third point (Y), however, is unsta-ble: populations near here will move towards either point X or
point Z. Moreover, there are joint populations close to point X where the arrows lead to the zone around point Z, and jointpopulations close to point Z where the arrows lead back to thezone around point X. Even small environmental perturbations could put a population near point X on a path towards point Z,and vice versa.
The behavior of a hypothetical population, consistent with 
the arrows in Figure 10.22a, is plotted in Figure 10.22b on a joint abundance diagram, and in Figure 10.22c as a graph of numbers
against time. The prey population, in particular, displays an‘eruption’ in abundance, as it moves from a low-density equilib-rium to a high-density equilibrium and back again. This erup-tion is in no sense a reﬂection of an equally marked change inthe environment. It is, on the contrary, a pattern of abundancegenerated by the interaction itself (plus a small amount of enviro-nmental ‘noise’), and in particular it reﬂects the existence of multiple equilibria. Similar explanations may be invoked to explainapparently complicated patterns of abundance in nature.
There are certainly examples of natural populations exhi-
biting outbreaks of abundance from levels that are otherwise low and apparently stable (Figure 10.23a), and there are other examples in which populations appear to alternate between two 
stable densities (Figure 10.23b). But it does not follow that eachof these examples is necessarily an interaction with multipleequilibria.In some cases, a plausible argu-
ment for multiple equilibria can be put
forward. This is true, for instance, ofClark’s (1964) work in Australia on theeucalyptus psyllid ( Cardiaspina albitex-
tura), a homopteran bug (Figure 10.23a).
These insects appear to have a low-density equilibrium maintained
by their natural predators (especially birds), and a much less stable high-density equilibrium reﬂecting intraspeciﬁc competi-tion (the destruction of host tree foliage leading to reductions infecundity and survivorship). Outbreaks from one to the other canoccur when there is just a short-term failure of the predators toreact to an increase in the density of adult psyllids. Similarly, theobservation of two alternative equilibria in Figure 10.23b for 
the viburnum whiteﬂy, Aleurotrachelus jelinekii , is reinforced by 
a model for that population which predicts the same pattern(Southwood et al. , 1989).
Alternative stable states have also been proposed for a num-
ber of plant–herbivore interactions, often where increased graz-ing pressure seems to have led to the ‘collapse’ of the vegetationfrom a high biomass to a much lower one, which is then stablein the sense that there is no return to the high biomass state evenwhen grazing pressure is severely reduced (van de Koppel et al. ,
1997). The grasslands of the Sahel region of Africa, grazed by live-stock, and the arctic plants along the coast of Hudson Bay inCanada, grazed by geese, are both examples. The conventionalexplanation (Noy-Meir, 1975) has essentially been that depicted
in Figure 10.22: when driven to a low biomass, plants may havevery little material above ground and hence very limited powersof immediate regrowth. This is a classic ‘Allee effect’ – the prey322 CHAPTER 10
TimeNumbers(c)
N
P
Prey abundance ( N)Predator abundance (P )(b)
Prey abundance ( N)Predator abundance (P )(a)
XYZ
Figure 10.22 A predator–prey zero isocline model with multiple equilibria. (a) The prey zero isocline has a vertical section at low
densities and a hump; the predator zero isocline can therefore cross it three times. Intersections X and Z are stable equilibri a, but
intersection Y is an unstable ‘breakpoint’ from which the joint abundances move towards either intersection X or intersection Z . 
(b) A feasible path that the joint abundances might take when subject to the forces shown in (a). (c) The same joint abundances  
plotted as numbers against time, showing that an interaction with characteristics that do not change can lead to apparent ‘outb reaks’ 
in abundance.
sudden changes in
abundance: multipleequilibria – orsudden changes inthe environmentEIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 322•• ••THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 323
Figure 10.23 Possible examples of outbreaks and multiple equilibria. (a) Mean ratings of relative abundance of the eucalyptus psyllid,
Cardiaspina albitextura , in three study areas in Australia (A5, A7 and A9). (After Clark, 1962.) (b) The mean number of eggs per leaf of the
viburnum whiteﬂy, Aleurotrachelus jelinekii , on a viburnum bush in Silwood Park, Berkshire, UK. No samples were taken between 1978 
and 1979, and 1984 and 1985. (After Southwood et al. , 1989.) (c) Changes in the abundance of herons ( Ardea cinerea ) in England and Wales
(measured by the number of nests occupied) are readily attributable to changes in environmental conditions (particularly severe  winters).
(After Stafford, 1971.)A7A5A9
Mean rating A9Mean rating A5, A7(a)
Eggs per leaf(b)Number of occupied nests(c)
1928
Year5000
4500
304000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70Severe winters030
1954
Year1955 1956 1957 1958 195920
10
1960–1
Generations050
20
103040
1965–6 1970–1 1975–6 1980–1 1985–6 1990–10300
200
100EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 323324 CHAPTER 10
suffering from too low an abundance – leading to a marked
‘hump’ in their isocline. It may also be, however, that the plants’
problems at low biomass are compounded by soil deterioration– erosion, for example – introducing further positive feedback intothe system: high grazing leading to low plant biomass, leading 
to poorer growing conditions, leading to lower plant biomass, leading to even poorer growing conditions, and so on (van deKoppel et al. , 1997).
On the other hand, there are many cases in which sudden
changes in abundance are fairly accurate reﬂections of suddenchanges in the environment or a food source. For instance, thenumber of herons nesting in England and Wales normallyﬂuctuates around 4000–4500 pairs, but the population declinesmarkedly after particularly severe winters (Figure 10.23c). This
ﬁsh-eating bird is unable to ﬁnd sufﬁcient food when inlandwaters become frozen for long periods, but there is no sugges-tion that the lower population levels (2000–3000 pairs) are an alternative equilibrium. The population crashes are simply the result of density-independent mortality from which the heronsrapidly recover.
10.7 Beyond predator–prey
The simplest mathematical models of predator–prey interactions
produce coupled oscillations that are highly unstable. However,by adding various elements of realism to these models it is pos-sible to reveal the features of real predator–prey relationships that are likely to contribute to their stability. A further insight 
provided by models is that predator–prey systems may exist inmore than one stable state. We have seen that a variety of pat-terns in the abundance of predators and prey, both in nature andin the laboratory, are consistent with the conclusions derived from models. Unfortunately, we are rarely in a position to applyspeciﬁc explanations to particular sets of data, because the crit-ical experiments and observations to test the models have rarelybeen made. Natural populations are affected not just by their pred-ators or their prey, but also by many other environmental factors
that serve to ‘muddy the waters’ when direct comparisons are madewith simple models.
Moreover, the attention of both modelers and data gatherers
(not that the two need be different) is increasingly being directedaway from single- or two-species systems, towards those inwhich three species interact. For example, a pathogen attackinga predator that attacks a prey, or a parasitoid and a pathogen both attacking a prey/host. Interestingly, in several of these systems, unexpected dynamical properties emerge that are not just the expected blend of the component two-species interac-tions (Begon et al. , 1996; Holt, 1997). We return to the problems
of ‘abundance’ in a broader context in Chapter 14.Summary
Predator and prey populations display a variety of dynamic 
patterns. It is a major task for ecologists to account for the dif-ferences from one example to the next.
A number of mathematical models illustrate an underlying 
tendency for predator and prey populations to undergo coupled
oscillations (cycles) in abundance. We explain the Lotka–Volterramodel, which is the simplest differential equation predator–preymodel, and using zero isoclines we show that the coupled oscil-lations are structurally unstable in this case. The model also illus-trates the role of delayed density-dependent numerical responsesin generating the cycles. We explain, too, the Nicholson–Baileyhost–parasitoid model, which also displays unstable oscillations.
In both these models, cycles are several prey (host) genera-
tions in length, but other models of host–parasitoid (and host–
pathogen) systems are able to generate coupled oscillations justone host generation in length.
We ask whether there is good evidence for predator–prey cycles
in nature, focusing especially on a hare–lynx system and a mothattacked by two natural enemies. Even when predators or preyexhibit regular cycles in abundance, it is never easy to demon-strate that these are predator–prey cycles.
We begin an examination of the effects on dynamics of 
factors missing from the simplest models by looking at crowd-ing. For predators, the most important expression of this ismutual interference. We look at the effects of crowding in theLotka–Volterra model, including ratio-dependent predation: crowd-ing stabilizes the dynamics, although this effect is strongest when
the predators are least efﬁcient. Essentially similar conclusionsemerge from modiﬁcations of the Nicholson–Bailey model.There is, though, little direct evidence for these effects in nature.
The functional response describes the effect of prey abundance
on predator consumption rate. The three types of functionalresponse are explained, including the role of handling time in generating type 2 responses, and of variations in handling timeand searching efﬁciency in generating type 3 responses. Weexplain the consequences for predator–prey dynamics of the different types of functional responses and of the ‘Allee effect’ (lowered recruitment at low abundance). Type 2 responses tendto destabilize, and type 3 responses to stabilize, but these are notnecessarily important in practice.
Predators often (but not always) exhibit an aggregative
response. We examine the effects of refuges and partial refugesin the Lotka–Volterra model, suggesting that spatial hetero-geneities, and the responses to them, stabilize predator–preydynamics, often at low prey densities. However, further work,especially with host–parasitoid systems and the Nicholson–Bailey model, shows that the effects of heterogeneity are com-plex. Stability arises through ‘aggregation of risk’, strengtheningdirect density dependencies that already exist. But aggregativeresponses that are spatially density dependent are least likely to
•• ••EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 324THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PREDATION 325
lead to aggregation of risk and least likely to enhance stability.
Models with within-generation movement further underminethe signiﬁcance of aggregative responses in stabilizing host–parasitoid interactions. A metapopulation perspective emphas-izes that patch differences may stabilize through asynchrony,
and also that predator–prey interactions may generate spatial aswell as temporal patterns.In practice, the stabilizing effects of metapopulation structure
and of refuges have been demonstrated, and the general import-
ance of responses to spatial heterogeneity in the choice of bio-control agents has been the subject of lively debate.
Finally, predator–prey systems with more than one equilibrium
combination of predators and prey are examined as a possible basis
for prey (or predator) outbreaks.
•• ••EIPC10  10/24/05  2:02 PM  Page 325••11.1 Introduction
When plants and animals die, their
bodies become resources for otherorganisms. Of course, in a sense, mostconsumers live on dead material – the
carnivore catches and kills its prey, and the living leaf taken by a
herbivore is dead by the time digestion starts. The critical distinctionbetween the organisms in this chapter, and herbivores, carnivoresand parasites, is that the latter all directly affect the rate at whichtheir resources are produced. Whether it is lions eating gazelles,gazelles eating grass or grass parasitized by a rust fungus, the actof taking the resource harms the resource’s ability to regeneratenew resource (more gazelles or grass leaves). In contrast with thesegroups, saprotrophs (organisms that make use of dead organic matter) do not control the rate at which their resources are
made available or regenerate; they are dependent on the rate atwhich some other force (senescence, illness, ﬁghting, the shed-ding of leaves by trees) releases the resource on which they live.Exceptions exist among necrotrophic parasites (see Chapter 12)that kill and then continue to extract resources from the dead host.Thus, the fungus Botrytis cinerea attacks living bean leaves but con-
tinues this attack after the host’s death. Similarly, maggots of thesheep blowﬂy Lucilia cuprina may parasitize and kill their host,
whereupon they continue to feed on the corpse. In these casesthe saprotroph can be said to have a measure of control over thesupply of its food resource.
We distinguish two groups of
saprotrophs: decomposers (bacteria
and fungi) and detritivores (animalconsumers of dead matter). Pimm(1982) described the relationship thatgenerally exists between decomposers
or detritivores and their food as donor controlled : the donor (prey;
i.e. dead organic matter) controls the density of the recipient (predator; i.e. decomposer or detritivore) but not the reverse. This is fundamentally different from truly interactive predator–prey 
interactions (see Chapter 10). However, while there is generallyno direct feedback between decomposers/detritivores and the deadmatter consumed (and thus donor-controlled dynamics apply), nevertheless it is possible to see an indirect ‘mutualistic’ effectthrough the release of nutrients from decomposing litter, whichmay ultimately affect the rate at which trees produce more litter.
In fact, it is in nutrient recycling that decomposers and detritivores
play their most fundamental role (see Chapter 19). More gener-ally, of course, the food webs associated with decomposition arejust like food webs based on living plants: they have a number oftrophic levels, including predators of decomposers (microbivores)and of detritivores, and consumers of these predators, and exhibita range of trophic interactions (not just donor controlled).
Immobilization occurs when an 
inorganic nutrient element is incorpor-
ated into an organic form – primarilyduring the growth of green plants.Conversely, decomposition involves the release of energy and themineralization of chemical nutrients – the conversion of elements
from an organic to inorganic form. Decomposition is deﬁned asthe gradual disintegration of dead organic matter and is broughtabout by both physical and biological agencies. It culminates withcomplex, energy-rich molecules being broken down by theirconsumers (decomposers and detritivores) into carbon dioxide,water and inorganic nutrients. Some of the chemical elements will have been locked up for a time as part of the body structureof the decomposer organisms, and the energy present in the organicmatter will have been used to do work and is eventually lost as
heat. Ultimately, the incorporation of solar energy in photosyn-thesis, and the immobilization of inorganic nutrients into biomass,is balanced by the loss of heat energy and organic nutrientswhen the organic matter is mineralized. Thus a given nutrientmolecule may be successively immobilized and mineralized in arepeated round of nutrient cycling. We discuss the overall roleplayed by decomposers and detritivores in the ﬂuxes of energy
saprotrophs:
detritivores anddecomposers . . .
. . . do not generallycontrol their supplyof resources – ‘donorcontrol’decompositiondeﬁned
Chapter 11
Decomposers and
Detritivores
EIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 326DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 327
and nutrients at the ecosystem level in Chapters 17 and 18. In the
present chapter, we introduce the organisms involved and lookin detail at the ways in which they deal with their resources.
It is not only the bodies of dead ani-
mals and plants that serve as resources
for decomposers and detritivores. Deadorganic matter is continually producedduring the life of both animals and
plants and can be a major resource. Unitary organisms shed deadparts as they develop and grow – the larval skins of arthropods,the skins of snakes, the skin, hair, feathers and horn of other vertebrates. Specialist feeders are often associated with thesecast-off resources. Among the fungi there are specialist decom-posers of feathers and of horn, and there are arthropods that 
specialize on sloughed off skin. Human skin is a resource for thehousehold mites that are omnipresent inhabitants of house dustand cause problems for many allergy sufferers.
The continual shedding of dead
parts is even more characteristic ofmodular organisms. Some polyps on a colonial hydroid or coral die and
decompose, while other parts of the same genet continue to regen-erate new polyps. Most plants shed old leaves and grow new ones;the seasonal litter fall onto a forest ﬂoor is the most importantof all the sources of resource for decomposers and detritivores,but the producers do not die in the process. Higher plants alsocontinually slough off cells from the root caps, and root cortical
cells die as a root grows through the soil. This supply of organicmaterial from roots produces the very resource-rich rhizosphere.
Plant tissues are generally leaky, and soluble sugars and nitrogen-ous compounds also become available on the surface of leaves,supporting the growth of bacteria and fungi in the phyllosphere.
Finally, animal feces, whether pro-
duced by detritivores, microbivores,herbivores, carnivores or parasites, are
a further category of resource for decomposers and detritivores.They are composed of dead organic material that is chemicallyrelated to what their producers have been eating.
The remainder of this chapter is in two parts. In Section 11.2
we describe the ‘actors’ in the saprotrophic ‘play’, and considerthe relative roles of the bacteria and fungi on the one hand, andthe detritivores on the other. Then, in Section 11.3, we consider,in turn, the problems and processes involved in the consumptionby detritivores of plant detritus, feces and carrion.
11.2 The organisms
11.2.1 Decomposers: bacteria and fungi
If scavengers do not take a dead resource immediately it dies (such
as hyenas consuming a dead zebra), the process of decomposi-tion usually starts with colonization by bacteria and fungi. Otherchanges may occur at the same time: enzymes in the dead tissue
may start to autolyze it and break down the carbohydrates andproteins into simpler, soluble forms. The dead material may alsobecome leached by rainfall or, in an aquatic environment, maylose minerals and soluble organic compounds as they are washedout in solution.
Bacteria and fungal spores are
omnipresent in the air and the water,and are usually present on (and oftenin) dead material before it is dead.They usually have ﬁrst access to a resource. These earlycolonists tend to use soluble materials, mainly amino acids andsugars that are freely diffusible. They lack the array of enzymesnecessary for digesting structural materials such as cellulose,lignin, chitin and keratin. Many species of Penicillium ,Mucor and
Rhizopus , the so-called ‘sugar fungi’ in soil, grow fast in the early
phases of decomposition. Together with bacteria having similaropportunistic physiologies, they tend to undergo populationexplosions on newly dead substrates. As the freely availableresources are consumed, these populations collapse, leaving veryhigh densities of resting stages from which new populationexplosions may develop when another freshly dead resourcebecomes available. They may be thought of as the opportunist‘r-selected species’ among the decomposers (see Section 4.12).
Another example is provided by the early colonizers of nectar in
ﬂowers, predominantly yeasts (simple sugar fungi); these mayspread to the ripe fruit where they act on sugar in the juice toproduce alcohol (as happens in the industrial production of wineand beer).
In nature, as in industrial processes
such as the making of wine or sauer-kraut, the activity of the early colonizersis dominated by the metabolism ofsugars and is strongly inﬂuenced by aeration. When oxygen is infree supply, sugars are metabolized to carbon dioxide by grow-ing microbes. Under anaerobic conditions, fermentations producea less complete breakdown of sugars to by-products such as alcohol and organic acids that change the nature of the environ-
ment for subsequent colonizers. In particular, the lowering of thepH by the production of acids has the effect of favoring fungalas opposed to bacterial activity.
Anoxic habitats are characteristic of
waterlogged soils and, more particu-larly, of sediments of oceans and lakes.Aquatic sediments receive a continuoussupply of dead organic matter fromthe water column above but aerobic decomposition (mainly by
bacteria) quickly exhausts the available oxygen because this canonly be supplied from the surface of the sediment by diffusion.Thus, at some depth, from zero to a few centimeters below thesurface, depending mainly on the load of organic material, sedimentsare completely anoxic. Below this level are found a variety of bac-terial types that employ different forms of anaerobic respiration
••decomposition . . .
. . . of dead bodies, . . .
...o f  s hed parts of
organisms . . .
. . . and of fecesbacteria and fungiare early colonists ofnewly dead material
domestic andindustrialdecomposition
aerobic andanaerobicdecomposition in natureEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 327328 CHAPTER 11
– that is, they use terminal inorganic electron acceptors other than
oxygen in their respiratory process. The bacterial types occur ina predictable pattern with denitrifying bacteria at the top, sulfate-reducing bacteria next and methanogenic bacteria in the deepestzone. Sulfate is comparatively abundant in sea water and so the
zone of sulfate-reducing bacteria is particularly wide (Fenchel,1987b). In contrast, the concentration of sulfate in lakes is low,and methanogenesis plays a correspondingly larger role (Holmer& Storkholm, 2001).
A strong element of chance determines which species are the
ﬁrst to colonize newly dead material, but in some environmentsthere are specialists with properties that enhance their chancesof arriving early. Litter that falls into streams or ponds is oftencolonized by aquatic fungi (e.g. Hyphomycetes), which bear
spores with sticky tips (Figure 11.1a) and are often of a curiousform that seems to maximize their chance of being carried to andsticking to leaf litter. They may spread by growing from cell tocell within the tissues (Figure 11.1b).
After the colonization of terrestrial
litter by the ‘sugar’ fungi and bacteria,and perhaps also after leaching by rainor in the water, the residual resourcesare not diffusible and are more resistant
to attack. In broad terms, the major components of dead terrest-rial organic matter are, in a sequence of increasing resistance todecomposition: sugars <(less resistant than) starch <hemicellu-
loses, pectins and proteins <cellulose <lignins <suberins <cutins.
Hence, after an initial rapid breakdown of sugar, decomposition
proceeds more slowly, and involves microbial specialists that can use celluloses and lignins and break down the more com-plex proteins, suberin (cork) and cuticles. These are structural compounds, and their breakdown and metabolism depend on very intimate contact with the decomposers (most cellulases are surface enzymes requiring actual physical contact between the decomposer organism and its resource). The processes ofdecomposition may now depend on the rate at which fungal hyphae
can penetrate from cell to cell through ligniﬁed cell walls. In thedecomposition of wood by fungi (mainly homobasidiomycetes),two major categories of specialist decomposers can be recognized:the brown rots that can decompose cellulose but leave a pre-
dominantly lignin-based brown residue, and the white rots thatdecompose mainly the lignin and leave a white cellulosic residue(Worrall et al. , 1997). The tough silicon-rich frustules of dead
diatoms in the phytoplankton communities of lakes and oceansare somewhat analogous to the wood of terrestrial communities.The regeneration of this silicon is critical for new diatomgrowth, and decomposition of the frustules is brought about byspecialized bacteria (Bidle & Azam, 2001).
The organisms capable of dealing
with progressively more refractory
compounds in terrestrial litter rep-resent a natural succession starting with simple sugar fungi (mainly Phy-comycetes and Fungi Imperfecti), usually followed by septate fungi (Basidiomycetes and Actinomycetes) and Ascomycetes,which are slower growing, spore less freely, make intimate con-tact with their substrate and have more specialized metabolism.The diversity of the microﬂora that decomposes a fallen leaf tends to decrease as fewer but more highly specialized species are concerned with the last and most resistant remains.
The changing nature of a resource during its decomposition
is illustrated in Figure 11.2a for beech leaf litter on the ﬂoor of a
cool temperate deciduous forest in Japan. Polyphenols and solublecarbohydrates quickly disappeared, but the resistant structural holocellulose and lignin decomposed much more slowly. The fungiresponsible for leaf decomposition follow a succession that is asso-ciated with the changing nature of the resource. The frequencyof occurrence of early species, such as Arthrinium sp. (Figure 11.2b),
was correlated with declines in holocellulose and soluble carbo-hydrate concentrations; Osono and Takeda (2001) suggest that they
•• ••(a) (b)
50 µmFigure 11.1 (a) Spores (conidia) of 
aquatic hyphomycete fungi from river
foam. (b) Rhizomycelium of the aquaticfungus Cladochytrium replicatum within 
the epidermis of an aquatic plant. The
circular bodies are zoosporangia. (AfterWebster, 1970.)
decomposition of
more resistant tissuesproceeds more slowlysuccession ofdecomposingmicroorganismsEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 328DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 329
depend on these components for their growth. Many late
species, such as Mortierella ramanniana , seem to rely on sugars
released by other fungi capable of decomposing lignin.
Individual species of microbial
decomposer are not biochemically
very versatile; most of them can cope with only a limited number ofsubstrates. It is the diversity of species
involved that allows the structurally and chemically complex tissues of a plant or animal corpse to be decomposed. Betweenthem, a varied microbiota of bacteria and fungi can accomplishthe complete degradation of dead material of both plants and animals. However, in practice they seldom act alone, and the process would be much slower and, moreover, incomplete, if 
they did so. The major factor that delays the decomposition oforganic residues is the resistance to decomposition of plant cell
walls – an invading decomposer meets far fewer barriers in ananimal body. The process of plant decomposition is enormouslyspeeded up by any activity that grinds up and fragments the tissues,such as the chewing action of detritivores. This breaks open cellsand exposes the contents and the surfaces of cell walls to attack.
11.2.2 Detritivores and specialist microbivores
The microbivores are a group of animals
that operate alongside the detritivores,and which can be difﬁcult to distin-guish from them. The name microbivoreis reserved for the minute animals that
specialize at feeding on microﬂora, and are able to ingest bacteriaor fungi but exclude detritus from their guts. Exploitation of thetwo major groups of microﬂora requires quite different feedingtechniques, principally because of differences in growth form.Bacteria (and yeasts) show a colonial growth form arising by the division of unicells, usually on the surface of small particles.Specialist consumers of bacteria are inevitably very small; theyinclude free-living protozoans such as amoebae, in both soil and aquatic environments, and the terrestrial nematode Pelodera ,
which does not consume whole sediment particles but grazes
among them consuming the bacteria on their surfaces. Themajority of fungi, in contrast to most bacteria, are ﬁlamentous,producing extensively branching hyphae, which in many speciesare capable of penetrating organic matter. Some specialist con-sumers of fungi possess piercing, sucking stylets (e.g. the nema-tode Ditylenchus ) that they insert into individual fungal hyphae.
However, most fungivorous animals graze on the hyphae and consume them whole. In some cases, close mutualistic relation-ships exist between fungivorous beetles, ants and termites and characteristic species of fungi. These mutualisms are discussed in Chapter 13.
Note that microbivores consume a living resource and may
not be subject to donor-controlled dynamics (Laakso et al. , 2000).
In a study of decomposition of lake weed and phytoplankton 
in laboratory microcosms, Jurgens and Sala (2000) followed thefate of bacteria (decomposers) in the presence and absence of bacteria-grazing protists, namely Spumella sp. and Bodo saltans
(microbivores). In the presence of the microbivores, there was a reduction of 50–90% in bacterial biomass and the bacterial community became dominated by large, grazer-resistant formsincluding ﬁlamentous bacteria.
The larger the animal, the less able it is to distinguish between
microﬂora as food and the plant or animal detritus on which theseare growing. In fact, the majority of the detritivorous animalsinvolved in the decomposition of dead organic matter are gener-alist consumers, of both the detritus itself and the associatedmicroﬂoral populations.
•• ••
Frequency of occurrence of species (%)040
18 36 01 2 3 0 620
24(b)
080
18 36
Time (months)01 2 3 0 640
24(c)Remaining weight (%)
0100
18 36 01 2 3 0 650(a)
24Lignin
Holocellulose
Soluble carbohydrate
Polyphenol
Figure 11.2 (a) Changes in the composition of beech 
(Fagus crenata ) leaf litter (in mesh bags) during decomposition 
on a woodland ﬂoor in Japan over a 3-year period. Amounts are
expressed as percentages of the starting quantities. (b, c) Changesin the frequency of occurrence of fungal species representative of:
(b) early species ( Arthrinium sp.) and (c) late species ( Mortierella
ramanniana ). (After Osono & Takeda, 2001.)
most microbial
decomposers arerelatively specializedspecialist consumersof microbialorganisms:microbivoresEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 329330 CHAPTER 11
The protists and invertebrates that
take part in the decomposition of dead
plant and animal materials are a taxo-nomically diverse group. In terrestrialenvironments they are usually classiﬁed
according to their size. This is not an
arbitrary basis for classiﬁcation, because size is an important feature for organisms that reach their resources by burrowingor crawling among cracks and crevices of litter or soil. The microfauna (including the specialist microbivores) includes proto-
zoans, nematode worms and rotifers (Figure 11.3). The principal
groups of the mesofauna (animals with a body width between 
100µm and 2 mm) are litter mites (Acari), springtails (Collembola)
and pot worms (Enchytraeidae). The macrofauna (2–20 mm body
width) and, lastly, the megafauna (> 20 mm) include woodlice
(Isopoda), millipedes (Diplopoda), earthworms (Megadrili), snails
and slugs (Mollusca) and the larvae of certain ﬂies (Diptera) andbeetles (Coleoptera). These animals are mainly responsible for the
•• ••64 16 4 2 4 8 16 32 128 256 512 1024 2 4 16 32 8
mm µm
Body widthBacteria
AraneidaFungi
Nematoda
Protozoa
Rotifera
Acari
Collembola
Protura
Diplura
Symphyla
Enchytraeidae
Chelonethi
Isoptera
Opiliones
Isopoda
Amphipoda
Chilopoda
Diplopoda
DipteraMegadrili (earthworms)
Coleoptera
Mollusca100 µm 2 mm 20 mmMicroflora and microfauna Mesofauna Macro- and megafauna
Figure 11.3 Size classiﬁcation by 
body width of organisms in terrestrial
decomposer food webs. The followinggroups are wholly carnivorous: Opiliones(harvest spiders), Chilopoda (centipedes)
and Araneida (spiders). (After Swift et al. ,
1979.)
classiﬁcation of
decomposers . . .. . . by size interrestrialenvironments . . .EIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 330DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 331
initial shredding of plant remains. By their action, they may
bring about a large-scale redistribution of detritus and thus contribute directly to the development of soil structure. It is important to note that the microfauna, with their short genera-tion times, operate at the same scale as bacteria and can track 
bacterial population dynamics, whilst the mesofauna and thefungi they mainly depend on are both longer lived. The largestand longest lived detritivores, in contrast, cannot be ﬁnely selective in their diet, but choose patches of high decomposer activity ( J. M. Anderson, personal communication).
Long ago, Charles Darwin (1888) estimated that earthworms
in some pastures close to his house formed a new layer of soil18 cm deep in 30 years, bringing about 50 tons ha
−1to the soil sur-
face each year as worm casts. Figures of this order of magnitude
have since been conﬁrmed on a number of occasions. Moreover,not all species of earthworm put their casts above ground, so the total amount of soil and organic matter that they move 
may be much greater than this. Where earthworms are abundant,they bury litter, mix it with the soil (and so expose it to otherdecomposers and detritivores), create burrows (so increasing soilaeration and drainage) and deposit feces rich in organic matter.It is not surprising that agricultural ecologists become worried aboutpractices that reduce worm populations.
Detritivores occur in all types of terrestrial habitat and are often
found at remarkable species richness and in very great numbers.Thus, for example, a square meter of temperate woodland soilmay contain 1000 species of animals, in populations exceeding 10 million for nematode worms and protozoans, 100,000 forspringtails (Collembola) and soil mites (Acari), and 50,000 or so for other invertebrates (Anderson, 1978). The relative import-ance of microfauna, mesofauna and macrofauna in terrestrial
communities varies along a latitudinal gradient (Figure 11.4).The microfauna is relatively more important in the organic soilsin boreal forest, tundra and polar desert. Here the plentiful
organic matter stabilizes the moisture regime in the soil and provides suitable microhabitats for the protozoans, nematodes androtifers that live in interstitial water ﬁlms. The hot, dry, mineralsoils of the tropics have few of these animals. The deep organicsoils of temperate forests are intermediate in character; theymaintain the highest mesofaunal populations of litter mites,springtails and pot worms. The majority of the other soil animalgroups decline in numbers towards the drier tropics, where they
are replaced by termites. Lower mesofaunal diversity in these tropical regions may be related to a lack of litter due to decomposition and consumption by termites, reﬂecting bothlow resource abundance and few available microhabitats ( J. M.Anderson, personal communication).
On a more local scale, too, the nature and activity of the 
decomposer community depends on the conditions in which theorganisms live. Temperature has a fundamental role in determining
•• ••Figure 11.4 Patterns of latitudinal
variation in the contribution of the macro-,
meso- and microfauna to decomposition in terrestrial ecosystems. Soil organicmatter (SOM) accumulation (inversely
related to litter breakdown rate) ispromoted by low temperatures andwaterlogging, where microbial activity is impaired. (Swift et al. , 1979.)
Biomass
Tropical
desertTropical
forestGrass-
landTemperate
forestBoreal
forestTundra Polar
desert
Litter breakdown rate
SOM accumulationMicrofaunaMesofaunaMacrofaunaEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 331332 CHAPTER 11
the rate of decomposition and, moreover, the thickness of water
ﬁlms on decomposing material places absolute limits on mobilemicrofauna and microﬂora (protozoa, nematode worms, rotifersand those fungi that have motile stages in their life cycles). In drysoils, such organisms are virtually absent. A continuum can be
recognized from dry conditions through waterlogged soils totrue aquatic environments. In the former, the amount of waterand thickness of water ﬁlms are of paramount importance, butas we move along the continuum, conditions change to resemblemore and more closely those of the bed of an open-water com-munity, where oxygen shortage, rather than water availability,may dominate the lives of the organisms.
In freshwater ecology the study of
detritivores has been concerned less
with the size of the organisms thanwith the ways in which they obtaintheir food. Cummins (1974) devised a
scheme that recognizes four main categories of invertebrate consumer in streams. Shredders are detritivores that feed on
coarse particulate organic matter (particles > 2 mm in size), and
during feeding these serve to fragment the material. Very oftenin streams, the shredders, such as cased caddis-ﬂy larvae of
Stenophylax spp., freshwater shrimps ( Gammarus spp.) and isopods
(e.g. Asellus spp.), feed on tree leaves that fall into the stream.
Collectors feed on ﬁne particulate organic matter ( < 2 mm). Two
subcategories of collectors are deﬁned. Collector–gatherers obtain
dead organic particles from the debris and sediments on the 
bed of the stream, whereas collector–ﬁlterers sift small particles 
from the ﬂowing column of water. Some examples are shown in Figure 11.5. Grazer–scrapers have mouthparts appropriate for
scraping off and consuming the organic layer attached to rocksand stones; this organic layer is comprised of attached algae, bacteria, fungi and dead organic matter adsorbed to the substratesurface. The ﬁnal invertebrate category is carnivores. Figure 11.6
shows the relationships amongst these invertebrate feeding groups
and three categories of dead organic matter. This scheme, devel-oped for stream communities, has obvious parallels in terrestrialecosystems (Anderson, 1987) as well as in other aquatic ecosystems.Earthworms are important shredders in soils, while a variety ofcrustaceans perform the same role on the sea bed. On the otherhand, ﬁltering is common among marine but not terrestrialorganisms.
•• ••. . . and by feeding
mode in aquaticenvironmentsTipula
– cranefly
larvaShredders
Gammarus
– freshwater
shrimp
Nemurella
– stonefly
larvaCollector–gatherers
Ephemera
– burrowing mayfly
larvaTubifex
– oligochaete
worm
Chironomus
– midge
larvaGrazer–scrapers
Heptagenia
– mayfly larvaGlossoma
– cased caddis
Collector–filterers
Simulium
– blackfly
larva Hydropsyche
– net-spinning caddis fly
larva and its filtering netCarnivores
Sialis
– alderfly larva
Cordulegaster
– dragonfly larva
Glossiphonia
– leech
Figure 11.5 Examples of the various categories of invertebrate consumer in freshwater environments.EIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 332DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 333
The feces and bodies of aquatic invertebrates are generally 
processed along with dead organic matter from other sources 
by shredders and collectors. Even the large feces of aquatic ver-tebrates do not appear to possess a characteristic fauna, probablybecause such feces are likely to fragment and disperse quickly 
as a result of water movement. Carrion also lacks a specializedfauna – many aquatic invertebrates are omnivorous, feeding formuch of the time on plant detritus and feces with their asso-ciated microorganisms, but ever ready to tackle a piece of deadinvertebrate or ﬁsh when this is available. This contrasts with the situation in the terrestrial environment, where both feces andcarrion have specialized detritivore faunas (see Sections 11.3.3 and 11.3.5).
Some animal communities are
composed almost exclusively of detri-
tivores and their predators. This is truenot only of the forest ﬂoor, but also of
shaded streams, the depths of oceans and lakes, and the perm-anent residents of caves: in short, wherever there is insufﬁcientlight for appreciable photosynthesis but nevertheless an input oforganic matter from nearby plant communities. The forest ﬂoorand shaded streams receive most of their organic matter as deadleaves from trees. The beds of oceans and lakes are subject to acontinuous settlement of detritus from above. Caves receive dis-solved and particulate organic matter percolating down throughsoil and rock, together with windblown material and the debrisof migrating animals.11.2.3 The relative roles of decomposers and
detritivores
The roles of the decomposers and 
detritivores in decomposing deadorganic matter can be compared in avariety of ways. A comparison of numbers will reveal a predominance
of bacteria. This is almost inevitable because we are counting 
individual cells. A comparison of biomass gives a quite differentpicture. Figure 11.7 shows the relative amounts of biomass rep-
resented in different groups involved in the decomposition of litter on a forest ﬂoor (expressed as the relative amounts of nitro-gen present). For most of the year, decomposers (microorganisms)accounted for ﬁve to 10 times as much of the biomass as the detri-tivores. The biomass of detritivores varied less through the yearbecause they are less sensitive to climatic change, and they were
actually predominant during a period in the winter.
Unfortunately, the biomass present in different groups of
decomposers is itself a poor measure of their relative importancein the process of decomposition. Populations of organisms withshort lives and high activity may contribute more to the activit-ies in the community than larger, long-lived, sluggish species (e.g. slugs!) thatmake a greater contribution to biomass.
Lillebo et al. (1999) attempted to
distinguish the relative roles, in the
•• ••Tree leaves etc.
LeachingShredders
Flocculation
Microbial action
AlgaeCollectors Carnivores
Grazer–scrapersCPOM
DOM FPOM
Organic
layer
on stonesMechanical disruption
Microbial action
Figure 11.6 A general model of energy ﬂow in a stream. A fraction of coarse particulate organic matter (CPOM) is quickly lost to the
dissolved organic matter (DOM) compartment by leaching. The remainder is converted by three processes to ﬁne particulate organi c
matter (FPOM): (i) mechanical disruption by battering; (ii) processing by microorganisms causing gradual break up; and (iii) fr agmentation
by the shredders. Note also that all animal groups contribute to FPOM by producing feces (dashed lines). DOM is also converted into
FPOM by a physical process of ﬂocculation or via uptake by microorganisms. The organic layer attached to stones on the stream b ed
derives from algae, DOM and FPOM adsorbed onto an organic matrix.
detritivore-dominated
communitiesassessing the relativeimportance ofdecomposers anddetritivores . . .
...i n  t h edecomposition of asalt marsh plant, . . .EIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 333••334 CHAPTER 11
of Spartina leaves remained in the bacteria treatment, whereas only
8% remained when the microfauna and macrofauna were also 
present (Figure 11.8a). Separate analyses of the mineralization of the carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus content of the leaves also revealed that bacteria were responsible for the majority of
the mineralization, but that microfauna and particularly macro-fauna enhanced the mineralization rates in the case of carbon andnitrogen (Figure 11.8b).
The decomposition of dead material is not simply due to 
the sum of the activities of microbes and detritivores: it is largelythe result of interaction between the two. The shredding actionof detritivores, such as the snail Hydrobia ulvae in the experi-
ment of Lillebo et al. (1999), usually produces smaller particles
with a larger surface area (per unit volume of litter) and thus
increases the area of substrate available for microorganismgrowth. In addition, the activity of fungi may be stimulated by the disruption, through grazing, of competing hyphal net-works. Moreover, the activity of both fungi and bacteria may be enhanced by the addition of mineral nutrients in urine and feces (Lussenhop, 1992).
The ways in which the decom-
posers and detritivores interact might bestudied by following a leaf fragmentthrough the process of decomposition,focusing attention on a part of the wall of a single cell. Initially,when the leaf falls to the ground, the piece of cell wall is protected from microbial attack because it lies within the plant
tissue. The leaf is now chewed and the fragment enters the gutof, say, an isopod. Here it meets a new microbial ﬂora in the gut and is acted on by the digestive enzymes of the isopod. Thefragment emerges, changed by its passage through the gut. It isnow part of the isopod’s feces and is much more easily attackedby microorganisms, because it has been fragmented and partiallydigested. While microorganisms are colonizing, it may again be
••decomposition of the salt marsh plant Spartina maritima , of 
bacteria, microfauna (e.g. ﬂagellates) and macrofauna (e.g. the snail
Hydrobia ulvae ) by creating artiﬁcial communities in laboratory
microcosms. At the end of the 99-day study, 32% of the biomass
0Mineralization (%)(b)
100
Macrofauna +
microfauna +
bacteriaMicrofauna +
bacteriaBacteria75
5025
0Weight loss (%)(a)
100
Macrofauna +
microfauna +
bacteriaMicrofauna +
bacteriaBacteria755025CN P
Figure 11.8 (a) Weight loss of Spartina maritima leaves during 99 days in the presence of: (i) macrofauna +microfauna +bacteria, 
(ii) microfauna +bacteria, or (iii) bacteria alone (mean ± SD). (b) Percentage of initial carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus content that was
mineralized during 99 days in the three treatments. (After Lillebo et al. , 1999.)Nitrogen content (g m–2)
0.01
J
Time (month)FMAMJ JASOND0.050.10.51510
NematodesEarthwormsArthropodsMicroflora
Figure 11.7 The relative importance in forest litter
decomposition of microﬂora in comparison with arthropods,
earthworms and nematodes, expressed in terms of their relativecontent of nitrogen – a measure of their biomass. Microbialactivity is much greater than that of detritivores but the latter is
more constant through the year. (After Ausmus et al. , 1976.). . . in a terrestrial
environment, . . .EIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 334••DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 335
eaten, perhaps by a coprophagous springtail, and pass through the
new environment of the springtail’s gut. Incompletely digestedfragments may again appear, this time in springtail feces, yet moreeasily accessible to microorganisms. The fragment may passthrough several other guts in its progress from being a piece of
dead tissue to its inevitable fate of becoming carbon dioxide andminerals.
Fragmentation by detritivores plays
a key role in terrestrial situationsbecause of the tough cell walls charac-teristic of vascular plant detritus. The
same is true in many freshwater environments where terrestriallitter makes up most of the available detritus. In contrast, detritusat the lowest trophic level in marine environments consists of 
phytoplankton cells and seaweeds; the former present a high surface area without the need for physical disruption and the latter, lacking the structural polymers of vascular plant cell walls, are prone to fragmentation by physical factors. Rapiddecomposition of marine detritus is probably less dependent onfragmentation by invertebrates; shredders are rare in the marineenvironment compared to its terrestrial and freshwater counter-parts (Plante et al. , 1990).
Dead wood provides particular
challenges to colonization by microor-ganisms because of its patchy distribu-
tion and tough exterior. Insects can enhance fungal colonizationof dead wood by carrying fungi to their ‘target’ or by enhancing
access of air-disseminated fungal propagules by making holes inthe outer bark into the phloem and xylem. Muller et al. (2002)distributed standard pieces of spruce wood ( Picea abies ) on a 
forest ﬂoor in Finland. After 2.5 years, the numbers of insect 
‘marks’ (boring and gnawing) were recorded and were found tobe correlated with dry weight loss of the wood (Figure 11.9a).This relationship comes about because of biomass consump-
tion by the insects but also, to an unknown extent, by fungal action that has been enhanced by insect activity. Thus, fungal infection rate was always high when there were more than 400 marks per piece of wood made by the common ambrosia beetle Tripodendron lineatum (Figure 11.9b). This species burrows
deeply into the sapwood and produces galleries about 1 mm indiameter. Some of the fungal species involved are likely to havebeen transmitted by the beetle (e.g. Ceratocystis piceae ) but the 
invasion of other, air-disseminated types is likely to have been 
promoted by the galleries left by the beetle.
The enhancement of microbial res-
piration by the action of detritivoreshas also been reported in the decom-position of small mammal carcasses.Two sets of insect-free rodent carcasses weighing 25 g wereexposed under experimental conditions in an English grasslandin the fall. In one set the carcasses were left intact. In the other,the bodies were artiﬁcially riddled with tunnels by repeatedpiercing of the material with a dissecting needle to simulate theaction of blowﬂy larvae in the carcass. The results of this experi-ment paralleled those of the wood decomposition study above;here, the tunnels enhanced microbial activity (Figure 11.10) by
disseminating the microﬂora as well as increasing the aeration ofthe carcass.
••
Dry weight loss (%)
–1020
6000 4000 010(a)
20000
Insect marks (no. m–2)
Number of isolates
010
2000 015(b)
10005
T. lineatum  marks (no. m–2)
Figure 11.9 Relationships between (a) the decay of standard pieces of dead spruce wood over a 2.5-year period in Finland and the
number of insect marks, and (b) the fungal infection rate (number of fungal isolates per standard piece of wood) and number of marks
made by the beetle Tripodendron lineatum . Dry weight loss and number of insect marks in (a) were obtained by subtracting the values for
each wood sample held in a permanently closed net cage from the corresponding value for its counterpart in a control cage that permitted
insect entry. In some cases, the dry weight loss of the counterpart wood sample was lower, so the percentage weight loss was ne gative.
This is possible because the number of insect visits does not explain all the variation in dry weight loss. (After Muller et al. , 2002.)
. . . in a freshwater
environment, . . .
...i n  dead wood . . ....a n d  i n  small
mammal carcassesEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 335336 CHAPTER 11
11.2.4 Ecological stoichiometry and the chemical
composition of decomposers, detritivores 
and their resources
Ecological stoichiometry, deﬁned by
Elser and Urabe (1999) as the analysisof constraints and consequences inecological interactions of the mass bal-ance of multiple chemical elements
(particularly the ratios of carbon tonitrogen and of carbon to phosphorus),
is an approach that can shed light on the relations betweenresources and consumers. Many studies have focused on plant–herbivore relations (Hessen, 1997) but the approach is alsoimportant when considering decomposers, detritivores and theirresources.
There is a great contrast between the chemical composition
of dead plant tissue and that of the tissues of the heterotrophic
organisms that consume and decompose it. While the majorcomponents of plant tissues, particularly cell walls, are structuralpolysaccharides, these are only of minor signiﬁcance in the bod-ies of microorganisms and detritivores. However, being harderto digest than storage carbohydrates and protein, the structuralchemicals still form a signiﬁcant component of detritivore feces.Detritivore feces and plant tissue have much in common chem-ically, but the protein and lipid contents of detritivores anddecomposers are signiﬁcantly higher than those of plants and feces.The rate at which dead organic
matter decomposes is strongly depend-
ent on its biochemical composition.This is because microbial tissue has
very high nitrogen and phosphoruscontents, indicative of high require-ments for these nutrients. Roughly speaking, the stoichiometricratios of carbon : nitrogen (C : N) and carbon : phosphorus (C : P)in decomposers are 10 : 1 and 100 : 1, respectively (e.g. Goldmanet al. , 1987). In other words, a microbial population of 111 g can
only develop if there is 10 g of nitrogen and 1 g of phosphorusavailable. Terrestrial plant material has much higher ratios, ranging from 19 to 315 : 1 for C : N and from 700 to 7000 : 1 forC : P (Enriquez et al. , 1993). Consequently, this material can 
support only a limited biomass of decomposer organisms and the whole pace of the decomposition process will itself be lim-ited by nutrient availability. Marine and freshwater plants and 
algae tend to have ratios more similar to the decomposers(Duarte, 1992), and their rates of decomposition are corres-pondingly faster (Figure 11.11a). Figure 11.11b and c illustrate thestrong relationships between initial nitrogen and phosphorusconcentration in plant tissue and its decomposition rate for a widerange of plant detritus from terrestrial, freshwater and marinespecies.
The rate at which dead organic
matter decomposes is also inﬂuenced by
inorganic nutrients, especially nitrogen(as ammonium or nitrate), that areavailable from the environment. Thus,greater microbial biomass can be supported, and decompositionproceeds faster, if nitrogen is absorbed from outside. For example,grass litter decomposes faster in streams running through tussockgrassland in New Zealand that has been improved for pasture(where the water is, in consequence, richer in nitrate) than in ‘unim-
proved’ settings (Young et al. , 1994).
One consequence of the capacity of
decomposers to use inorganic nutrientsis that after plant material is added tosoil, the level of soil nitrogen tends tofall rapidly as it is incorporated intomicrobial biomass. The effect is particularly evident in agriculture,where the ploughing in of stubble can result in nitrogen deﬁciencyof the subsequent crop. In other words, the decomposers compete
with the plants for inorganic nitrogen. This raises a signiﬁcant andsomewhat paradoxical issue. We have noted that plants anddecomposers are linked by an indirect mutualism mediated by nutri-
ent recycling – plants provide energy and nutrients in organic formthat are used by decomposers, and decomposers mineralize theorganic material back to an inorganic form that can again be used by plants. However, stoichiometric constraints on carbonand nutrients also lead to competition between the plants and decom-
posers (usually for nitrogen in terrestrial communities, often 
•• ••‘ecological
stoichiometry’ andrelations betweenresources andconsumers
µl of CO2 per hour per gram
initial dry weight of carcass150
100
50
Time (days)Artificially
tunneledcarcass
Intact
carcass
15
0 5 10
Figure 11.10 The evolution of carbon dioxide (CO2), a measure
of microbial activity, from carcasses of small mammals placed in
‘respiration’ cylinders and screened from insect attack. One set of carcasses was left intact, while the second set was piercedrepeatedly with a dissecting needle to simulate the action of
tunneling by blowﬂy larvae. (After Putman, 1978a.)decomposition rate
depends on . . .. . . biochemicalcomposition . . .
. . . and mineralnutrients in theenvironment
complex relationshipsbetween decomposersand living plants, . . .EIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 336DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 337
for phosphorus in freshwater communities, and either nitrogen
or phosphorus in marine communities).
Daufresne and Loreau (2001) devel-
oped a model that incorporates bothmutualistic and competitive relation-
ships and posed the question ‘what
conditions must be met for plants and decomposers to coexist andfor the ecosystem as a whole to persist?’ Their model showed thatthe plant–decomposer system is generally persistent (both plantand decomposer compartments reach a stable positive steady state) only if decomposer growth is limited by the availability ofcarbon in the detritus – and this condition can only be achievedif the competitive ability of the decomposers for a limiting nutrient (e.g. nitrogen) was great enough, compared to that 
of plants, to maintain themselves in a state of carbon limitation.When decomposers were not competitive enough, they becamenutrient-limited and the system eventually collapsed. Daufresneand Loreau (2001) note that the few experimental studies so far performed show bacteria can, in fact, outcompete plants forinorganic nutrients.
In contrast to terrestrial plants, the bodies of animals have 
nutrient ratios that are of the same order as those of microbialbiomass; thus their decomposition is not limited by the availabilityof nutrients, and animal bodies tend to decompose much fasterthan plant material.
When dead organisms or their parts decompose in or on soil,
they begin to acquire the C : N ratio of the decomposers. On the
whole, if material with a nitrogen content of less than 1.2–1.3%is added to soil, any available ammonium ions are absorbed. Ifthe material has a nitrogen content greater than 1.8%, ammoniumions tend to be released. One consequence is that the C : N ratios
of soils tend to be rather constant around values of 10; the decom-poser system is in general remarkably homeostatic. However, inextreme situations, where the soil is very acid or waterlogged,the ratio may rise to 17 (an indication that decomposition is slow).
It should not be thought that the only activity of the micro-
bial decomposers of dead material is to respire away the carbon
and mineralize the remainder. A major consequence of microbialgrowth is the accumulation of microbial by-products, particularlyfungal cellulose and microbial polysaccharides, which may them-selves be slow to decompose and contribute to maintaining soilstructure.
11.3 Detritivore–resource interactions
11.3.1 Consumption of plant detritus
Two of the major organic components of dead leaves and 
wood are cellulose and lignin. These pose considerable digestiveproblems for animal consumers, most of which are not capableof manufacturing the enzymatic machinery to deal with them.Cellulose catabolism (cellulolysis) requires cellulase enzymes.
Without these, detritivores are unable to digest the cellulose com-
ponent of detritus, and so cannot derive from it either energy to do work or the simpler chemical modules to use in their owntissue synthesis. Cellulases of animal origin have been deﬁnitelyidentiﬁed in remarkably few species, including a cockroach andsome higher termites in the subfamily Nasutitermitinae (Martin,1991) and the shipworm Teledo navalis , a marine bivalve mollusc
•• ••Microalgae
Freshwater plants
Amphibious plants
Sea grassesMacroalgae
Grasses
Sedges
Mangroves
Broad deciduous tree leaves
Shrubs
Conifers
Broad perennial tree leaves(a)
0.0001
Decomposition rates (day–1)0.001 0.01 0.1(b)
0.01
Nitrogen (% dry weight)0.10 1 100.00010.0010.1
0.01(c)
0.01
Phosphorus (% dry weight)0.1 1 10 0.001 k (day–1)
Figure 11.11 (a) Box plots showing the recorded decomposition rates of detritus from different sources. The decomposition rate is
expressed as k(in log units per day), derived from the equation Wt=W0e−kt, which describes the loss in plant dry weight ( W) with time ( t)
since the initiation of measurements. Boxes encompass the 25 and 75% quartiles of all data from the literature for each plant t ype. The
central line represents the median and bars extend to the 95% conﬁdence limits. The relationships between decomposition rate an d the
initial concentrations in the tissues (% dry weight) of (b) nitrogen and (c) phosphorus are also shown. Solid lines represent ﬁ tted regression
lines and open and closed circles represent detritus decomposing on land and submersed, respectively. (After Enriquez et al. , 1993.)
. . . competition and
mutualismEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 337338 CHAPTER 11
that bores into the hulls of ships. In these organisms, cellulolysis
poses no special problems.
The majority of detritivores, lacking
their own cellulases, rely on the pro-duction of cellulases by associated
decomposers or, in some cases, protozoa.The interactions range from obligate
mutualism between a detritivore and 
a speciﬁc and permanent gut microﬂora or microfauna, through facultative mutualism , where the animals make use of cellulases 
produced by a microﬂora that is ingested with detritus as itpasses through an unspecialized gut, to animals that ingest themetabolic products of external cellulase-producing microﬂoraassociated with decomposing plant remains or feces (Figure 11.12).
A wide range of detritivores appear
to have to rely on the exogenous
microbial organisms to digest cellu-lose. The invertebrates then consumethe partially digested plant detritus
along with its associated bacteria and fungi, no doubt obtaininga signiﬁcant proportion of the necessary energy and nutrients bydigesting the microﬂora itself. These animals, such as the spring-tail Tomocerus , can be said to be making use of an ‘external
rumen’ in the provision of assimilable materials from indigestibleplant remains. This process reaches a pinnacle of specializationin ambrosia beetles and in certain species of ants and termites that‘farm’ fungus in specially excavated gardens (see Chapter 13).
Clear examples of obligate mutual-
ism are found amongst certain species
of cockroach and termite that rely onsymbiotic bacteria or protozoa for thedigestion of structural plant polysac-charides. Nalepa et al. (2001) describe the evolution of digestive mutualisms among the Dictyoptera 
(cockroaches and termites) from cockroach-like ancestors in theUpper Carboniferous that fed on rotting vegetation and relied on an ‘external rumen’. The next stages involved progressive internalization of the microbiota associated with plant detritus,
from indiscriminate coprophagy (feeding on feces of a variety ofdetritivorous species) through increasing levels of gregarious and social behavior that ensured neonates received appropriateinnocula of gut biota. When proctodeal trophallaxis (the directtransfer of hindgut ﬂuids from the rectal pouch of the parent tothe mouth of the newborn young) evolved in certain cockroachesand lower termites, some microbes were captured and becameecologically dependent on the host. This specialized state ensuredthe direct transfer of the internal rumen, particularly those 
components that would degenerate if exposed to the external environment. In lower termites, such as Eutermes , symbiotic pro-
tozoa may make up more than 60% of the insect’s body weight.The protozoa are located in the hindgut, which is dilated to form a rectal pouch. They ingest ﬁne particles of wood, and areresponsible for extensive cellulolytic activity, though bacteria are also implicated. Termites feeding on wood generally show effective digestion of cellulose but not of lignin, except for Reticuli-
termes , which has been reported to digest 80% or more of the lignin
present in its food.
Given the versatility apparent in
the evolutionary process, it may seemsurprising that so few animals that
consume plants can produce their own cellulase enzymes.Janzen (1981) has argued that cellulose is the master constructionmaterial of plants ‘for the same reason that we construct housesof concrete in areas of high termite activity’. He views the useof cellulose, therefore, as a defense against attack, since higherorganisms can rarely digest it unaided. From a different perspective,
•• ••most detritivores 
rely on microbialcellulases – they donot have their own
woodlice rely oningested microbialorganisms
cockroaches andtermites rely onbacteria andprotozoa1 Animal
cellulases4 No
cellulases
active in gut2 Cellulases produced
by symbiontspermanently locatedin modified region of gut3 Cellulases produced
by ingested microfloraduring passage throughunspecialized gut
External rumen
Cellulases of soil andlitter microflora actingon plant detritus beforeingestion and/or on feceswhich are reingestedInternal rumenIngestion of
cellulose bydetritivore
Cellulolysis
Figure 11.12 The range of mechanisms
that detritivores adopt for digesting
cellulose (cellulolysis). (After Swift et al. , 1979.)
why no animal
cellulases?EIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 338DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 339
it has been suggested that cellulolytic capacity is uncommon
simply because it is a trait that is rarely advantageous for animalsto possess (Martin, 1991). For one thing, diverse bacterial com-munities are commonly found in hindguts and this may have facilitated the evolution of symbiont-mediated cellulolysis. For
another, the diets of plant-eaters generally suffer from a limitedsupply of critical nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, ratherthan of energy, which cellulolysis would release. This imposes theneed for processing large volumes of material to extract therequired quantities of nutrients, rather than extracting energyefﬁciently from small volumes of material.
Because microbes, plant detritus and
animal feces are often very intimatelyassociated, there are inevitably many
generalist consumers that ingest all theseresources. In other words, many animalssimply cannot manage to take a mouth-
ful of one without the others. Figure 11.13 shows the various components of the gut contents of 45 springtail species (allspecies combined) collected at different depths in the litter andsoil of beech forests in Belgium. Species that occurred in the top2 cm lived in a habitat derived from beech leaves at variousstages of microbial decomposition where microalgae, feces of slugsand woodlice, and pollen grains were also common. Their dietscontained all the local components but little of the very abund-ant beech litter. At intermediate depths (2–4 cm) the springtailsate mainly spores and hyphae of fungi together with invertebrate
feces (particularly the freshly deposited feces of enchytraeid pot worms). At the lowest depths, their diets consisted mainly ofmycorrhizal material (the springtails browsed the fungal part ofthe fungal/plant root assemblage) and higher plant detritus (mainlyderived from plant roots). There were clear interspeciﬁc differencesin both depth distributions and the relative importance of the 
different dietary components, and some species were more specialized feeders than others (e.g. Isotomiella minor ate only
feces whereas Willemia aspinata ate only fungal hyphae). But
most consumed more than one of the potential diet components
and many were remarkably generalist (e.g. Protaphorura eichhorni
and Mesaphorura yosii ) (Ponge, 2000).
11.3.2 Consumption of fallen fruit
Of course, not all plant detritus is so
difﬁcult for detritivores to digest. Fallenfruit, for example, is readily exploitedby many kinds of opportunist feeders, including insects, birds andmammals. However, like all detritus, decaying fruits have asso-
ciated with them a microﬂora, in this case mainly dominated byyeasts. Fruit-ﬂies ( Drosophila spp.) specialize at feeding on these
yeasts and their by-products; and in fruit-laden domestic compostheaps in Australia, ﬁve species of fruit-ﬂy show differing pre-ferences for particular categories of rotting fruit and vegetables(Oakeshott et al. , 1982). Drosophila hydei and D. immigrans pre-
fer melons, D. busckii specializes on rotting vegetables, while 
D. simulans is catholic in its tastes for a variety of fruits. The 
common D. melanogaster , however, shows a clear preference for 
rotting grapes and pears. Note that rotting fruits can be highly
alcoholic. Yeasts are commonly the early colonists and the fruitsugars are fermented to alcohol, which is normally toxic, even-tually even to the yeasts themselves. D. melanogaster tolerates 
such high levels of alcohol because it produces large quantitiesof alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), an enzyme that breaks downethanol to harmless metabolites. Decaying vegetables produce 
•• ••Figure 11.13 The distribution of gut
content categories of springtails ( n=6255)
(Collembola; all species combined) in
relation to depth in the litter/soil of beechforests in Belgium. (After Ponge, 2000.)0Index of abundance in guts1400
0–11200
1000
800600400200
1–2 2–3 3–4 4–5 5–6 6–7 7–8 8–9 10–11 12–13 14–15
9–10Empty guts
MycorrhizaeHigher plant materialMicroalgaePollenFungal material
Feces
Depth (cm)
detritus and
microbial organismsare typicallyconsumed togetherfruit-ﬂies and rotten fruitEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 339340 CHAPTER 11
little alcohol, and D. busckii , which is associated with them, pro-
duces very little ADH. Intermediate levels of ADH were produced
by the species preferring moderately alcoholic melons. The boozyD. melanogaster is also associated with winery wastes!
11.3.3 Feeding on invertebrate feces
A large proportion of dead organicmatter in soils and aquatic sedimentsmay consist of invertebrate feces, whichgeneralist detritivores often include in
their diets. Some of the feces derive from grazing insects. In the
laboratory, the feces of caterpillars of Operophthera fagata that had
grazed leaves of beech ( Fagus sylvatica ) under the inﬂuence of leach-
ing and microbial degradation decomposed faster than leaf litteritself; however, the decomposition rate was much enhancedwhen detritivorous isopods ( Porcellio scabar and Oniscus asellus ) 
fed on the feces (Figure 11.14). Thus, rates of decomposition andnutrient release into the soil from grazer feces can be increasedthrough the feeding activity of coprophagous detritivores.
Feces of detritivores are common 
in many environments. It some cases,
reingestion of feces may be criticallyimportant, by providing essential micro-nutrients or highly assimilable resources.
In most cases, however, there are probably not marked nutritivebeneﬁts of feeding on feces compared with the detritus from whichthe feces were derived. Thus, the isopod Porcellio scabar gained
no more from feeding on its feces, even when these were experi-mentally inoculated with microbes, than from feeding directly on the leaf litter of alder ( Alnus glutinosa ) (Kautz et al. , 2002). On
the other hand, in the case of the less nutritionally preferred leavesof oak ( Quercus robur ), inoculated feces provided a small butsigniﬁcant increase in growth rate compared to the parent oak
leaf material. Coprophagy may be more valuable when detritalquality is particularly low.
A remarkable story of coprophagy
was unraveled in some small bog lakes
in northeast England (MacLachlan et al. ,
1979). These murky water bodies haverestricted light penetration because of dissolved humic substancesderived from the surrounding sphagnum peat, and they are characteristically poor in plant nutrients. Primary production is insigniﬁcant. The main organic input consists of poor-qualitypeat particles resulting from wave erosion of the banks. By thetime the peat has settled from suspension it has been colonized,
mainly by bacteria, and its caloric and protein contents haveincreased by 23 and 200%, respectively. These small particles areconsumed by Chironomus lugubris larvae, the detritivorous young
of a nonbiting chironomid midge. The feces the larvae producebecome quite richly colonized by fungi, microbial activity isenhanced, and they would seem to constitute a high-quality food resource. But they are not reingested by Chironomus larvae,
mainly because they are too large and too tough for its mouth-
parts to deal with. However, another common inhabitant of thelake, the small crustacean Chydorus sphaericus , ﬁnds chironomid
feces very attractive. It seems always to be associated with themand probably depends on them for food. Chydorus clasps the 
chironomid fecal pellet just inside the valve of its carapace androtates it while grazing the surface, causing gradual disintegration.In the laboratory, the presence of chydorids has been shown tospeed up dramatically the breakdown of large Chironomus pellets
to smaller particles. The ﬁnal and most intriguing twist to the story is that the fragmented chironomid feces (mixed probablywith chydorid feces) are now small enough to be used again byChironomus. It is probable that Chironomus lugubris larvae grow 
faster when in the presence of Chydorus sphaericus because of 
•• ••isopods do best when
they can eat theirown feces
Cumulative mass loss (%)100
020406080
Time (weeks)12 9 6 3 0Feces + isopods
Litter + isopods
Feces
LitterFigure 11.14 The cumulative mass loss 
of beech leaf litter and feces of grazing
caterpillars ( Operophthera fagata ) in the
presence and absence of feeding byisopods. Standard errors are shown. 
(After Zimmer & Topp, 2002.)
‘coprophagy’ may be
more valuable whendetrital quality is lowa midge and acladoceran eat eachother’s fecesEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 340DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 341
the availability of suitable fecal material to eat. The interaction
beneﬁts both participants.
11.3.4 Feeding on vertebrate feces
The dung of carnivorous vertebrates isrelatively poor-quality stuff. Carnivoresassimilate their food with high efﬁciency(usually 80% or more is digested) and
their feces retain only the least digestible components. In addi-
tion, carnivores are necessarily much less common than herbi-vores, and their dung is probably not sufﬁciently abundant tosupport a specialist detritivore fauna. What little research has beendone suggests that decay is effected almost entirely by bacteriaand fungi (Putman, 1983).
In contrast, herbivore feces still con-
tain an abundance of organic matter.Autocoprophagy (reingesting one’sown feces) is quite a widespread habit
among small to medium-sized mam-
malian herbivores, being reported from rabbits and hares, rodents,marsupials and a primate (Hirakawa, 2001). Many species producesoft and hard feces, and it is the soft feces that are usuallyreingested (directly from the anus), being rich in vitamins and micro-bial protein. If prevented from reingestion, many animals exhibitsymptoms of malnutrition and grow more slowly.
Herbivore dung is also sufﬁciently
thickly spread in the environment tosupport its own characteristic fauna,consisting of many occasional visitorsbut with several speciﬁc dung-feeders.Dung removal varies both seasonally
and spatially. In tropical and in warm temperate regions most 
activity occurs during summer rainfall, whereas in Mediterranean-type climates dung removal is highest during spring after the winter rainfall and again in mid-summer when temperatures are high (Davis, 1996). Dung removal also occurs at greater ratesin unshaded situations and is faster on sand than on harder,more compacted clay soils (Davis, 1996). A wide range of animalsare involved, including earthworms, termites and, in particular,beetles.
A good example of the predominant role of beetles is provided
by elephant dung. Two main patterns of decay can be recognized,related to the wet and dry seasons. During the rains, within a fewminutes of dung deposition the area is alive with beetles. The adultdung beetles feed on the dung but they also bury large quantit-ies along with their eggs to provide food for the developing larvae. For example, the large African dung beetle, Heliocopris 
dilloni , carves a lump out of fresh dung and rolls this away for
burying several meters from the original dung pile. Each beetleburies sufﬁcient dung for several eggs. Once underground, asmall quantity of dung is shaped into a cup, and lined with soil;
a single egg is laid and then more dung is added to produce asphere that is almost entirely covered with a thin layer of soil. A
small area at the top of the ball, close to the location of the egg,is left clear of soil, possibly to facilitate gas exchange. After hatch-ing, the larva feeds by a rotating action in the dung ball, exca-vating a hollow, and, incidentally, feeding on its own feces as wellas the elephant’s (Figure 11.15). When all the food supplied byits parents is used up, the larva covers the inside of its cell witha paste of its own feces, and pupates.
The full range of tropical dung 
beetles in the family Scarabeidae vary
in size from a few millimeters in lengthup to the 6 cm long Heliocopris. Not all
remove dung and bury it at a distance from the dung pile. Someexcavate their nests at various depths immediately below the pile, while others build nest chambers within the dung pile itself.Beetles in other families do not construct chambers but simplylay their eggs in the dung, and their larvae feed and grow within
the dung mass until fully developed, when they move away topupate in the soil. The beetles associated with elephant dung inthe wet season may remove 100% of the dung pile. Any left maybe processed by other detritivores such as ﬂies and termites, aswell as by decomposers.
Dung that is deposited in the dry season is colonized by 
relatively few beetles (adults emerge only in the rains). Some micro-bial activity is evident but this soon declines as the feces dry out.Rewetting during the rains stimulates more microbial activity butbeetles do not exploit old dung. In fact a dung pile deposited inthe dry season may persist for longer than 2 years, compared with24 h or less for one deposited during the rains.
Bovine dung has provided an extra-
ordinary and economically very import-
ant problem in Australia. During the past two centuries the cow populationincreased from just seven individuals (brought over by the ﬁrstEnglish colonists in 1788) to 30 million or so. These produce some300 million dung pats per day, covering as much as 6 million acres per year with dung. Deposition of bovine dung poses noparticular problem elsewhere in the world, where bovines haveexisted for millions of years and have an associated fauna thatexploits the fecal resources. However, the largest herbivorous ani-mals in Australia, until European colonization, were marsupialssuch as kangaroos. The native detritivores that deal with the dry,ﬁbrous dung pellets that these leave cannot cope with cow dung,and the loss of pasture under dung has imposed a huge economicburden on Australian agriculture. The decision was therefore madein 1963 to establish in Australia beetles of African origin, able todispose of bovine dung in the most important places and underthe most prevalent conditions where cattle are raised (Waterhouse,1974); more than 20 species have been introduced (Doube et al. ,
1991).
•• ••carnivore dung is
attacked mainly bybacteria and fungi
‘autocoprophagy’among mammalianherbivores
herbivore dungsupports its owncharacteristicdetritivoresa diversity of dungbeetles
Australian cow dungposes a problemEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 341342 CHAPTER 11
Adding to the problem, Australia is plagued by native bushﬂies
(Musca vetustissima ) and buffalo ﬂies ( Haematobia irritans exigua )
that deposit eggs on dung pats. The larvae fail to survive in dung
that has been buried by beetles, and the presence of beetles hasbeen shown to be effective at reducing ﬂy abundance (Tyndale-
Biscoe & Vogt, 1996). Success depends on dung being buried withinabout 6 days of production, the time it takes for the ﬂy egg (laidon fresh dung) to hatch and develop to the pupal stage. Edwardsand Aschenborn (1987) surveyed the nesting behavior in south-ern Africa of 12 species of dung beetles in the genus Onitis. They
concluded that O. uncinatus was a prime candidate for introduc-
tion to Australia for ﬂy-control purposes, since substantialamounts of dung were buried on the ﬁrst night after pad colon-ization. The least suitable species, O. viridualus , spent several 
days constructing a tunnel and did not commence burying until
6–9 days had elapsed.11.3.5 Consumption of carrion
When considering the decomposition of
dead bodies, it is helpful to distinguishthree categories of organisms that attackcarcasses. As before, both decomposersand invertebrate detritivores have a role to play. For example, the
tenebrionid beetles Argoporis apicalis and Cryptadius tarsalis are 
particularly abundant on islands in the Gulf of California wherelarge colonies of seabirds nest; here they feed on bird carcasses,as well as ﬁsh debris associated with the bird colonies (Sanchez-Pinero & Polis, 2000). In the case of carrion feeding, however,scavenging vertebrates are often also of considerable import-ance. Many carcasses of a size to make a single meal for one ofa few of these scavenging detritivores will be removed completelywithin a very short time of death, leaving nothing for bacteria,
•• ••
Figure 11.15 (a) An African dung beetle
rolling a ball of dung. (Courtesy of Heather
Angel.) (b) The larva of the dung beetleHeliocopris excavates a hollow as it feeds
within the dung ball. (After Kingston &
Coe, 1977.)
many carnivores are
opportunistic carrion-feeders . . .(b)EIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 342DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 343
fungi or invertebrates. This role is played, for example, by arctic
foxes and skuas in polar regions, by crows, gluttons and badgersin temperate areas, and by a wide variety of birds and mammals,including kites, jackals and hyenas, in the tropics.
The chemical composition of the
diet of carrion-feeders is quite distinct
from that of other detritivores, and
this is reﬂected in their complement of enzymes. Carbohydraseactivity is weak or absent, but protease and lipase activity is vigorous. Carrion-feeding detritivores possess basically the sameenzymatic machinery as carnivores, reﬂecting the chemical ident-ity of their food. In fact, many species of carnivore (such as lions,Panthera leo ) are also opportunistic carrion-feeders (DeVault &
Rhodes, 2002) whilst classic carrion-feeders such as hyenas ( Crocuta
crocuta ) sometimes operate as carnivores.
Arctic foxes ( Alopex lagopus ) illustrate
how the diet of facultative carrion-
feeders can vary with food availability.Lemmings ( Dicrostonyx and Lemmus
spp.) are the live prey of foxes over
much of their range and for much of the time (Elmhagen et al. ,
2000). However, lemming populations go through dramatic population cycles (see Chapter 14), forcing the foxes to switch toalternative foods such as migratory birds and their eggs (Samelius& Alisauskas, 2000). In winter, marine foods become available whenfoxes can move onto the sea ice and scavenge carcasses of sealskilled by polar bears. Roth (2002) investigated the extent to
which foxes switched to carrion feeding in winter by comparingthe ratios of carbon isotopes (
13C:12C) of suspected food (marine
organisms have characteristically higher ratios than terrestrial
organisms) and of fox hair (since carbon isotope signatures of pred-ator tissue reﬂect the ratios of the prey consumed). Figure 11.16shows that in three of the 4 years of the study the isotope 
signature of fox hair samples was much increased in winter, asexpected if seal carrion was a major component of the diet. In the winter of 1994, however, a marked shift was not evidentand it is of interest that lemming density was high at this time.It seems that foxes switched to seal carrion when the formationof sea ice made this possible, but only when alternative prey werenot available.
The relative roles played by decom-
posers, invertebrates and vertebrates
are inﬂuenced by factors that affect the speed with which carcasses are dis-covered by scavengers in relation to
the rate at which they disappear through microbial and inverteb-rate activity. This is illustrated for small rodent carcasses whose disappearance/decomposition was monitored in the Oxfordshirecountryside in both the summer–fall and winter–spring periods(Figure 11.17). There are two points to note. First, the rate at whichcarcasses were removed was faster during the summer and fall,reﬂecting a greater scavenger activity at this time (presumablybecause of higher scavenger population densities and/or higher
feeding rates – these were not monitored in the study). Secondly,a greater percentage of the rodent bodies were removed in thewinter–spring period, albeit over a longer timescale. At a time whenmicrobial decay proceeds most slowly, all the carcasses persisted
for long enough to be found by scavengers. During the summerand fall, decomposition was much more rapid and any carcass that was undiscovered for 7 or 8 days would have been largelydecomposed and removed by bacteria, fungi and invertebrate detritivores.
Certain components of animal cor-
pses are particularly resistant to attackand are the slowest to disappear. How-ever, some consumer species possess theenzymes to deal with them. For example, the blowﬂy larvae ofLucilia species produce a collagenase that can digest the collagen
•• ••. . . and vice versa
the arctic fox: a
facultative carrion-feeder
Lemming density (no. ha–1)16
02468101214
Year1997 1996 1995 1994(a)δ13C–18
–19–17
–20
–21
–22
–23
–24
–25(b)
Summer 93
Winter 94
Summer 94
Winter 95
Summer 95
Winter 96
Summer 96
Winter 972748102510119
9Winter hair (summer diet)
Summer hair (winter diet)
Figure 11.16 (a) Annual changes in lemming density in the
summer, near Cape Churchill in Manitoba, Canada, and (b) carbon
isotope ratios (mean ±SE) of fox hair in the winter (reﬂecting
summer diet) and in the summer (reﬂecting winter diet). Numberson the bars indicate sample sizes. (After Roth, 2002.)
seasonal variation 
in invertebrate andmicrobial activity
specialist consumersof bone, hair andfeathersEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 343344 CHAPTER 11
and elastin present in tendons and soft bones. The chief constituent
of hair and feathers, keratin, forms the basis of the diet of speciescharacteristic of the later stages of carrion decomposition, in particular tineid moths and dermestid beetles. The midgut of these insects secretes strong reducing agents that break the resistant covalent links binding together peptide chains in the 
keratin. Hydrolytic enzymes then deal with the residues. Fungiin the family Onygenaceae are specialist consumers of horn andfeathers. It is the corpses of larger animals that generally providethe widest variety of resources and thus attract the greatestdiversity of carrion consumers (Doube, 1987). In contrast, the carrion community associated with dead snails and slugs consistsof a relatively small number of sarcophagid and calliphorid ﬂies
(Kneidel, 1984).
One group of carrion-feeding inver-
tebrates deserves special attention –the burying beetles ( Nicrophorus spp.)
(Scott, 1998). These species live exclusively on carrion on whichthey play out their extraordinary life history. Adult Nicrophorus ,
using their sensitive chemoreceptors, arrive at the carcass of a smallmammal or bird within an hour or two of death. The beetle maytear ﬂesh from the corpse and eat it or, if decomposition is
sufﬁciently advanced, consume blowﬂy larvae instead. However,should a burying beetle arrive at a completely fresh corpse it setsabout burying it where it lies, or may drag the body (many timesits own weight) for several meters before starting to dig. It worksbeneath the corpse, painstakingly excavating and dragging the smallmammal down little by little until it is completely underground(Figure 11.18). The various species of Nicrophorus vary in body
size (and thus the size of corpse utilized), reproductive period (and
•• ••Time (days)Removal of carcasses (%)100
53 0 15 2080
60
20
01 040Decay complete,
summer and fall
Summer and fall
Winter and spring
Figure 11.17 The rate of removal of small mammal corpses in
the Oxfordshire (UK) countryside in two periods: summer–fall and
winter–spring. (After Putman, 1983.)
45 612 3
Figure 11.18 Burial of a mouse by a pair of Nicrophorus beetles. (After Milne & Milne, 1976.)remarkable burying
beetlesEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 344DECOMPOSERS AND DETRITIVORES 345
thus the season of activity), diel activity (some are diurnal, 
some crepuscular and some nocturnal) and the habitat they use(coniferous forest, hardwood forest, ﬁeld, marsh or generalist)(Scott, 1998). Some species, such as N. vespilloides , only just cover
the corpse, while others, including N. germanicus , may bury it to
a depth of 20 cm. During the excavation, other burying beetles
are likely to arrive. Competing individuals of the same or otherspecies are ﬁercely repulsed, sometimes leading to the death of one combatant. A prospective mate, on the other hand, isaccepted and the male and female work on together.
The buried corpse is much less susceptible to attack by other
invertebrates than it was while on the surface. Additional protectionis provided, under some circumstances, by virtue of a mutualisticrelationship between the beetles and a species of mite, Poecilochirus
necrophori , which invariably infests adult burying beetles, hitch-
ing a ride to a suitable carrion source. When the carcass is ﬁrst
buried the beetle systematically removes its hair and this clearsit of virtually all the eggs of blowﬂies. However, if the carcass isburied only shallowly, ﬂies will often lay more eggs and maggotswill compete with the beetle larvae. It is now that the presenceof mites has a beneﬁcial effect. By piercing and consuming theﬂy eggs, the mites keep the carcass free of the beetle’s competitorsand dramatically improve beetle brood success (Wilson, 1986). Bothadults, or sometimes just the female, remain in the chamber andprovide parental care. A conical depression is prepared in the topof the meat-ball, into which droplets of partially digested meatare regurgitated. Older larvae are able to feed themselves but only
when their offspring are ready to pupate do the adults force theirway out through the soil and ﬂy away.
We have already noted that in
freshwater environments carrion lack aspecialized fauna. However, specialistcarrion-feeders are found on the sea
bed in very deep parts of the oceans. As the detritus sinksthrough very deep water all but the largest particles of organicmatter are completely decomposed before they reach the bottom.In contrast, the occasional body of a ﬁsh, mammal or large invertebrate does settle on the sea bed. A remarkable diversity ofscavengers exist there, though at low density, and these possessseveral characteristics that match a way of life in which meals are well spread out in space and time. For example, Dahl (1979)described several genera of deep sea gammarid crustaceanswhich, unlike their relatives at shallower depths and in fresh water, possess dense bundles of exposed chemosensory hairsthat sense food, and sharp mandibles that can take large bites fromcarrion. These animals also have the capacity to gorge them-selves far beyond what is normal in amphipods. Thus Paralicella
possesses a soft body wall that can be stretched when feeding on a large meal so that the animal swells to two or three timesits normal size, and Hirondella has a midgut that expands to 
ﬁll almost the entire abdominal cavity and in which it can storemeat.11.4 Conclusion
Decomposer communities are, in their composition and activities,
as diverse as or more diverse than any of the communities more commonly studied by ecologists. Generalizing about themis unusually difﬁcult because the range of conditions experiencedin their lives is so varied. As in all natural communities, the inhab-
itants not only have specialized requirements for resources andconditions, but their activities change the resources and con-ditions available for others. Most of this happens hidden from the view of the observer, in the crevices and recesses of soil and litter and in the depths of water bodies.
Despite these difﬁculties, some broad generalizations may 
be made.
1Decomposers and detritivores tend to have low levels of
activity when temperatures are low, aeration is poor, soilwater is scarce and conditions are acid.
2The structure and porosity of the environment (soil or litter)is of crucial importance, not only because it affects the factorslisted in point 1 but because many of the organisms respons-ible for decomposition must swim, creep, grow or force theirway through the medium in which their resources are dispersed.
3The activities of the decomposers and detritivores are intimatelyinterlocked, and may in some cases be synergistic. For this reason, it is very difﬁcult to unravel their relative importancein the decomposition process.
4Many of the decomposers and detritivores are specialists andthe decay of dead organic matter results from the combined
activities of organisms with widely different structures, formsand feeding habits.
5Organic matter may cycle repeatedly through a succession of microhabitats within and outside the guts and feces of dif-ferent organisms, as they are degraded from highly organizedstructures to their eventual fate as carbon dioxide and mineralnutrients.
6The activity of decomposers unlocks the mineral resources such as phosphorus and nitrogen that are ﬁxed in dead organicmatter. The speed of decomposition will determine the rateat which such resources are released to growing plants (orbecome free to diffuse and thus to be lost from the ecosystem).This topic is taken up and discussed in Chapter 18.
7Many dead resources are patchily distributed in space and time. An element of chance operates in the process of theircolonization; the ﬁrst to arrive have a rich resource to exploit,but the successful species may vary from dung pat to dungpat, and from corpse to corpse. The dynamics of competitionbetween exploiters of such patchy resources require theirown particular mathematical models (see Chapter 8). Becausedetritus is often an ‘island’ in a sea of quite different habitat, itsstudy is conceptually similar to that discussed in Chapter 21under the heading of island biogeography (see Section 21.5).
•• ••carrion feeders on
the sea bedEIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 345346 CHAPTER 11
8Finally, it may be instructive at this point to switch the
emphasis away from the success with which decomposers anddetritivores deal with their resources. It is, after all, the fail-ure of organisms to decompose wood rapidly that makes theexistence of forests possible! Deposits of peat, coal and oil are
further testaments to the failures of decomposition.
Summary
We distinguish two groups of organisms that make use of dead
organic matter (saprotrophs): decomposers (bacteria and fungi)and detritivores (animal consumers of dead matter). These do not control the rate at which their resources are made availableor regenerate; they are dependent on the rate at which some other
force (senescence, illness, ﬁghting, the shedding of leaves by trees)releases the resource on which they live. They are donor controlled.Nevertheless, it is possible to see an indirect ‘mutualistic’ effectthrough the release of nutrients from decomposing litter, whichmay ultimately affect the rate at which trees produce more litter.
Immobilization occurs when an inorganic nutrient element is
incorporated into an organic form – primarily during the growthof green plants. Conversely, decomposition involves the releaseof energy and the mineralization of chemical nutrients – the 
conversion of elements from an organic to inorganic form. 
Decomposition is deﬁned as the gradual disintegration of dead organic matter and is brought about by both physical and biological agencies. It culminates, often after a reasonably pre-dictable succession of colonizing decomposers, with complexenergy-rich molecules being broken down into carbon dioxide,
water and inorganic nutrients.
Most microbial decomposers are quite specialized, as are 
the tiny consumers of bacteria and fungi (microbivores), butdetritivores are more often generalists. The larger the detritivore,the less able it is to distinguish between microbes as food and thedetritus on which these are growing. We discuss the relative roles
in decomposition of decomposers and detritivores in terrestrial,freshwater and marine environments.
The rate at which dead organic matter decomposes is strongly
dependent on its biochemical composition and on the availabil-ity of mineral nutrients in the environment. Two of the majororganic components of dead leaves and wood are cellulose andlignin. These pose considerable digestive problems for animal consumers, most of which are not capable of manufacturing 
the enzymatic machinery to deal with them. Most detritivoresdepend on microbial organisms to digest cellulose, in a varietyof increasingly intimate associations. Dead fruit is a lot easier fordetritivores to deal with.
Feces and carrion are abundant dead organic resources in all
environments and, once again, microbial organisms and detriti-vores both play important roles. Many detritivores feed on feces,and the dung of herbivores (but not carnivores) supports its own
characteristic fauna. Similarly, many carnivores are opportunisticfeeders on carrion but there is also a specialized carrion-feedingfauna.
Decomposer communities are, in their composition and act-
ivities, as diverse as or more diverse than any of the communitiesmore commonly studied by ecologists.
••EIPC11  10/24/05  2:03 PM  Page 346••12.1 Introduction: parasites, pathogens,
infection and disease
Previously, in Chapter 9, we deﬁned a parasite as an organism
that obtains its nutrients from one or a very few host individuals,normally causing harm but not causing death immediately. We must follow this now with some more deﬁnitions, since thereare a number of related terms that are often misused, and it is
important not to do so.
When parasites colonize a host, that host is said to harbor an
infection . Only if that infection gives rise to symptoms that are
clearly harmful to the host should the host be said to have a dis-
ease. With many parasites, there is a presumption that the host
can be harmed, but no speciﬁc symptoms have as yet beenidentiﬁed, and hence there is no disease. ‘ Pathogen ’ is a term that
may be applied to any parasite that gives rise to a disease (i.e. is ‘pathogenic’). Thus, measles and tuberculosis are infectious 
diseases (combinations of symptoms resulting from infections).Measles is the result of a measles virus infection; tuberculosis isthe result of a bacterial ( Mycobacterium tuberculosis ) infection. The
measles virus and M. tuberculosis are pathogens. But measles is not
a pathogen, and there is no such thing as a tuberculosis infection.
Parasites are an important group of organisms in the most dir-
ect sense. Millions of people are killed each year by various typesof infection, and many millions more are debilitated or deformed(250 million cases of elephantiasis at present, over 200 million casesof bilharzia, and the list goes on). When the effects of parasiteson domesticated animals and crops are added to this, the cost interms of human misery and economic loss becomes immense. Ofcourse, humans make things easy for the parasites by living in
dense and aggregated populations and forcing their domesticatedanimals and crops to do the same. One of the key questions wewill address in this chapter is: ‘to what extent are animals and plantpopulations in general affected by parasitism and disease?’
Parasites are also important numerically. An organism in a nat-
ural environment that does not harbor several species of parasiteis a rarity. Moreover, many parasites and pathogens are host-speciﬁc
or at least have a limited range of hosts. Thus, the conclusion seemsunavoidable that more than 50% of the species on the earth, andmany more than 50% of individuals, are parasites.
12.2 The diversity of parasites
The language and jargon used by plant pathologists and animalparasitologists are often very different, and there are importantdifferences in the ways in which animals and plants serve as habitats for parasites, and in the way they respond to infection.But for the ecologist, the differences are less striking than the 
resemblances, and we therefore deal with the two together. One distinction that isuseful, though, is that between microparasites
and macroparasites (Figure 12.1) (May & Anderson, 1979).
Microparasites are small and often
intracellular, and they multiply directlywithin their host where they are oftenextremely numerous. Hence, it is gen-erally difﬁcult, and usually inappropriate, to estimate precisely the number of microparasites in a host. The number of infected
hosts, rather than the number of parasites, is the parameter usually studied. For example, a study of a measles epidemic willinvolve counting the number of cases of the disease, rather thanthe number of particles of the measles virus.
Macroparasites have a quite different biology: they grow but do
not multiply in their host, and then produce specialized infect-ive stages (microparasites do not do this) that are released to infectnew hosts. The macroparasites of animals mostly live on the bodyor in the body cavities (e.g. the gut), rather than within the hostcells. In plants, they are generally intercellular. It is usually pos-sible to count or at least estimate the numbers of macroparasitesin or on a host (e.g. worms in an intestine or lesions on a leaf ),and the numbers of parasites as well as the numbers of infected
hosts can be studied by the epidemiologist.micro- and
macroparasites
Chapter 12
Parasitism and DiseaseEIPC12  10/24/05  2:04 PM  Page 347348 CHAPTER 12
Cutting across the distinction
between micro- and macroparasites,
parasites can also be subdivided intothose that are transmitted directly from
host to host and those that require a vector or intermediate 
host for transmission and therefore have an indirect life cycle. The term ‘vector’ signiﬁes an animal carrying a parasite from host to host, and some vectors play no other role than as a 
carrier; but many vectors are also intermediate hosts withinwhich the parasite grows and/or multiplies. Indeed, parasites with indirect life cycles may elude the simple micro/macro distinction. For example, schistosome parasites spend part of
their life cycle in a snail and part in a vertebrate (in some cases
a human). In the snail, the parasite multiplies and so behaves as
•• ••
Figure 12.1 Plant and animal micro- and macroparasites. 
(a) An animal microparasite: particles of the Plodia interpunctella
granulovirus (each within its protein coat) within a cell of their
insect host. (b) A plant microparasite: ‘club-root disease’ ofcrucifers caused by multiplication of Plasmodiophora brassicae. (c)
An animal macroparasite: a tapeworm. (d) A plant macroparasite:
powdery mildew lesions. Reproduced by permission of: (a) DrCaroline Grifﬁths; (b) Holt Studios/Nigel Cattlin; (c) AndrewSyred/Science Photo Library; and (d) Geoff Kidd/Science PhotoLibrary.(a)
(d)
direct and indirect
life cycles: vectors
(b)
(c)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 348PARASITISM AND DISEASE 349
a microparasite, but in an infected human the parasite grows and
produces eggs but does not itself multiply, and so behaves as amacroparasite.
12.2.1 Microparasites
Probably the most obvious microparasites are the bacteria andviruses that infect animals (such as the measles virus and the typhoidbacterium) and plants (e.g. the yellow net viruses of beet andtomato and the bacterial crown gall disease). The other major groupof microparasites affecting animals is the protozoa (e.g. the tryp-
anosomes that cause sleeping sickness and the Plasmodium species
that cause malaria). In plant hosts some of the simpler fungi behaveas microparasites.
The transmission of a microparasite from one host to another
can be in some cases almost instantaneous, as in venereal diseaseand the short-lived infective agents carried in the water dropletsof coughs and sneezes (inﬂuenza, measles, etc.). In other speciesthe parasite may spend an extended dormant period ‘waiting’ forits new host. This is the case with the ingestion of food or water
contaminated with the protozoan Entamoeba histolytica , which causes
amoebic dysentery, and with the plant parasite Plasmodiophora 
brassicae , which causes ‘club-root disease’ of crucifers.
Alternatively, a microparasite may depend on a vector for 
its spread. The two most economically important groups of vector-transmitted protozoan parasites of animals are the try-panosomes, transmitted by various vectors including tsetse ﬂies(Glossina spp.) and causing sleeping sickness in humans and
nagana in domesticated (and wild) mammals, and the variousspecies of Plasmodium , transmitted by anopheline mosquitoes
and causing malaria. In both these cases, the ﬂies act also as inter-mediate hosts, i.e. the parasite multiplies within them.
Many plant viruses are transmitted by aphids. In some ‘non-
persistent’ species (e.g. cauliﬂower mosaic virus), the virus is only
viable in the vector for 1 h or so and is often borne only on 
the aphid’s mouthparts. In other ‘circulative’ species (e.g. lettucenecrotic yellow virus), the virus passes from the aphid’s gut toits circulatory system and thence to its salivary glands. Here, thereis a latent period before the vector becomes infective, but it then remains infective for an extended period. Finally, there are‘propagative’ viruses (e.g. the potato leaf roll virus) that multiplywithin the aphid. Nematode worms are also widespread vectorsof plant viruses.
12.2.2 Macroparasites
The parasitic helminth worms are major macroparasites of 
animals. The intestinal nematodes of humans, for example, all ofwhich are transmitted directly, are perhaps the most importanthuman intestinal parasites, both in terms of the number of people infected and their potential for causing ill health. There
are also many types of medically important animal macroparasites with indirect life cycles. For example, the tapeworms are intest-inal parasites as adults, absorbing host nutrients directly across theirbody wall and proliferating eggs that are voided in the host’s feces.The larval stages then proceed through one or two intermediatehosts before the deﬁnitive host (in these cases, the human) is reinfected. The schistosomes, as we have seen, infect snails andvertebrates alternately. Human schistosomiasis (bilharzia) affectsthe gut wall where eggs become lodged, and also affects the bloodvessels of the liver and lungs when eggs become trapped theretoo. Filarial nematodes are another group of long-lived parasitesof humans that all require a period of larval development in ablood-sucking insect. One, Wucheria bancrofti , does its damage
(Bancroftian ﬁlariasis) by the accumulation of adults in the lymphaticsystem (classically, but only rarely, leading to elephantiasis). Larvae(microﬁlariae) are released into the blood and are ingested bymosquitoes, which also transmit more developed, infective larvaeback into the host. Another ﬁlarial nematode, Onchocerca volvulus ,
which causes ‘river blindness’, is transmitted by adult blackﬂies(the larvae of which live in rivers, hence the name of the disease).Here, though, it is the microﬁlariae that do the major damagewhen they are released into the skin tissue and reach the eyes.
In addition, there are lice, ﬂeas, ticks and mites and some fungi
that attack animals. Lice spend all stages of their life cycle on their
host (either a mammal or a bird), and transmission is usually bydirect physical contact between host individuals, often betweenmother and offspring. Fleas, by contrast, lay their eggs and spendtheir larval lives in the ‘home’ (usually the nest) of their host (again,a mammal or a bird). The emerging adult then actively locates a new host individual, often jumping and walking considerabledistances in order to do so.
Plant macroparasites include the higher fungi that give rise 
to the mildews, rusts and smuts, as well as the gall-forming andmining insects, and some ﬂowering plants that are themselves parasitic on other plants.
Direct transmission is common amongst the fungal macro-
parasites of plants. For example, in the development of mildew
on a crop of wheat, infection involves contact between a spore(usually wind dispersed) and a leaf surface, followed by penetra-tion of the fungus into or between the host cells, where it beginsto grow, eventually becoming apparent as a lesion of altered hosttissue. This phase of invasion and colonization precedes an infect-ive stage when the lesion matures and starts to produce spores.
Indirect transmission of plant macroparasites via an inter-
mediate host is common amongst the rust fungi. For example,
in black stem rust, infection is transmitted from an annual grass host (especially the cultivated cereals such as wheat) to the barberry shrub ( Berberis vulgaris ) and from the barberry 
back to wheat. Infections on the cereal are polycyclic, i.e. withina season spores may infect and form lesions that release spores that infect further cereal plants. It is this phase of intense
•• ••EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 349350 CHAPTER 12
multiplication by the parasite that is responsible for epidemic out-
breaks of disease. On the other hand, the barberry is a long-livedshrub and the rust is persistent within it. Infected barberry plantsmay therefore serve as persistent foci for the spread of the rustinto cereal crops.
Plants in a number of families have
become specialized as parasites on other
ﬂowering plants. These are of two quitedistinct types. Holoparasites , such as
dodder ( Cuscuta spp.), lack chlorophyll and are wholly dependent
on the host plant for their supply of water, nutrients and ﬁxedcarbon. Hemiparasites , on the other hand, such as the mistletoes
(Phoraradendron spp.), are photosynthetic but have a poorly
developed root system of their own, or none at all. They form
connections with the roots or stems of other species and drawmost or all of their water and mineral nutrients from the host.
12.2.3 Brood and social parasitism
At ﬁrst sight the presence of a section about cuckoos might 
seem out of place here. Mostly a host and its parasite come fromvery distant systematic groups (mammals and bacteria, ﬁsh andtapeworms, plants and viruses). In contrast, brood parasitism
usually occurs between quite closely related species and even
between members of the same species. Yet the phenomenon fallsclearly within the deﬁnition of parasitism (a brood parasite‘obtains its nutrients from one or a few host individuals, normally
causing harm but not causing death immediately’). Brood parasitism is well developed in social insects (sometimes then called social parasitism), where the parasites use workers ofanother, usually very closely related species to rear their progeny
(Choudhary et al. , 1994). The phenomenon is best known, how-
ever, amongst birds.
Bird brood parasites lay their eggs 
in the nests of other birds (Figure 12.2),which then incubate and rear them.They usually depress the nesting successof the host. Amongst ducks, intraspeciﬁc brood parasitism appears
to be most common. Most brood parasitism, however, is inter-
speciﬁc. About 1% of all bird species are brood parasites – including
about 50% of the species of cuckoos, two genera of ﬁnches, 
ﬁve cowbirds and a duck (Payne, 1977). They usually lay only asingle egg in the host’s nest and may adjust the host’s clutch sizeby removing one of its eggs. The developing parasite may evictthe host’s eggs or nestlings and harm any survivors by mono-polizing parental care. There is therefore the potential for brood parasites to have profound effects on the population dynamics of 
the host species. However, the frequency of parasitized nests is usually very low (less than 3%), and some time ago Lack (1963)concluded that ‘the cuckoo is an almost negligible cause of eggand nestling losses amongst English breeding birds’. None the less,some impression of the potential importance of brood parasitesis apparent from the fact that magpies ( Pica pica ) in populations
that coexist with great spotted cuckoos ( Clamator glandarius ) in
Europe invest their reproductive effort into laying signiﬁcantly larger
clutches of eggs than those that live free of brood parasitism (Soleret al. , 2001) – but those eggs are smaller in compensation. The pre-
sumption that this is an evolutionary response to the losses theysuffer due to the cuckoos is supported by the fact that magpiesthat lay larger parasitized clutches do indeed have a higher prob-ability of successfully raising at least some of their own offspring.
•• ••
Figure 12.2 A cuckoo in the nest.
Reproduced by permission of 
FLPA/Martin B. Withers.
holo- and
hemiparasitic plantsthe ecologicalimportance of broodparasitic birdsEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 350PARASITISM AND DISEASE 351
Highly host-speciﬁc, polymorphic
relationships have evolved among
brood parasites. For instance, the
cuckoo Cuculus canorum parasitizes many different host species,
but there are different strains (‘gentes’) within the cuckoo species.
Individual females of one strain favor just one host species andlay eggs that match quite closely the color and markings of theeggs of the preferred host. Thus, amongst cuckoo females thereis marked differentiation between strains in their mitochondrialDNA, which is passed only from female to female, but not at‘microsatellite’ loci within the nuclear DNA, which containsmaterial from the male parents, who do not restrict matings to within their own strain (Gibbs et al. , 2000). It has long been
suggested (Punnett, 1933) that this is possible because the genes
controlling egg patterning are situated on the W chromosome,carried only by females. (In birds, unlike mammals, the femalesare the heterogametic sex.) This has now been established –though in great tits, Parus major , rather than in a species of brood
parasite (Gosler et al. , 2000). Females produce eggs that resemble
those of their mothers and maternal grandmothers (from whomthey inherit their W chromosome) but not those of their paternalgrandmothers. Of course, if female cuckoos lay eggs that look likethose of the species with which they were reared, it is also necessary for them to lay their eggs, inevitably or at least pre-ferentially, in the nests of that species. This is most likely to bethe result of early ‘imprinting’ (i.e. a learned preference) withinthe nest (Teuschl et al. , 1998).
12.3 Hosts as habitats
The essential difference between the ecology of parasites and 
that of free-living organisms is that the habitats of parasites are themselves alive. A living habitat is capable of growth (in numbers and/or size); it is potentially reactive, i.e. it can respondactively to the presence of a parasite by changing its nature,
developing immune reactions to the parasite, digesting it, isolat-
ing or imprisoning it; it is able to evolve; and in the case of manyanimal parasites, it is mobile and has patterns of movement thatdramatically affect dispersal (transmission) from one habitable hostto another.
12.3.1 Biotrophic and necrotrophic parasites
The most obvious response of a host to a parasite is for the whole
host to die. Indeed, we can draw a distinction between parasitesthat kill and then continue life on the dead host ( necrotrophic 
parasites ) and those for which the host must be alive ( biotrophic
parasites ).Necrotrophic parasites blur the tidy distinctions between
parasites, predators and saprotrophs (see Section 11.1). Insofar 
as host death is often inevitable and sometimes quite rapid,necrotrophic parasites are really predators, and once the host is
dead they are saprotrophs. But for as long as the host is alive,necroparasites share many features with other types of parasite.
For a biotrophic parasite, the death of its host spells the end
of its active life. Most parasites are biotrophic. Lucilia cuprina , the
blowﬂy of sheep, however, is a necroparasite on an animal host.The ﬂy lays eggs on the living host and the larvae (maggots) eatinto its ﬂesh and may kill it. The maggots continue to exploit thecarcass after death but they are now detritivores rather thaneither parasites or predators. Necroparasites on plants include manythat attack the vulnerable seedling stage and cause symptomsknown as ‘damping-off’ of seedlings. Botrytis fabi is a typical 
fungal necroparasite of plants. It develops in the leaves of the bean Vicia faba , and the cells are killed, usually in advance of pene-
tration. Spots and blotches of dead tissues form on the leaves andthe pods. The fungus continues to develop as a decomposer, andspores are formed and then dispersed from the dead tissue, butnot while the host tissue is still alive.
Most necroparasites can therefore
be regarded as pioneer saprotrophs.
They are one jump ahead of competi-tors because they can kill the host (orits parts) and so gain ﬁrst access to the resources of its dead body.The response of the host to necroparasites is never very subtle.Amongst plant hosts, the most common response is to shed the infected leaves, or to form specialized barriers that isolate theinfection. Potatoes, for example, form corky scabs on the tubersurface that isolate infections by Actinomyces scabies .
12.3.2 Host speciﬁcity: host ranges and zoonoses
We saw in the chapters on the interactions between predators
and their prey that there is often a high degree of specializa-tion of a particular predator species on a particular species of prey (monophagy). The specialization of parasites on one or arestricted range of host species is even more striking. For any 
species of parasite (be it tapeworm, virus, protozoan or fungus)the potential hosts are a tiny subset of the available ﬂora and fauna.The overwhelming majority of other organisms are quite unableto serve as hosts: often, we do not know why.
There are, though, some patterns to this speciﬁcity. It seems,
for example, that the more intimate a parasite’s association witha particular host individual, the more likely it is to be restrictedto a particular species of host. Thus, for example, most speciesof bird lice, which spend their entire lives on one host, exploit
only one host species, whereas louse ﬂies, which move activelyfrom one host individual to another, can use several species ofhost (Table 12.1).
The delineation of a parasite’s 
host range, however, is not always asstraightforward as one might imagine.
•• ••necroparasites:
pioneer saprotrophs
natural andaccidental hostshost-speciﬁcpolymorphisms: gentesEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 351352 CHAPTER 12
Species outside the host range are relatively easily characterized:
the parasite cannot establish an infection within them. But for those inside the host range, the response may range from a serious pathology and certain death to an infection with no overtsymptoms. What is more, it is often the ‘natural’ host of a para-
site, i.e. the one with which it has coevolved, in which infectionis asymptomatic. It is often ‘accidental’ hosts in which infectiongives rise to a frequently fatal pathology. (‘Accidental’ is anappropriate word here, since these are often dead-end hosts, that die too quickly to pass on the infection, within which thepathogen cannot therefore evolve – and towhich it cannot there-
fore be adapted.)
These issues take on not just para-
sitological but also medical importance
in the case of zoonotic infections : infec-
tions that circulate naturally, and havecoevolved, in one or more species ofwildlife but also have a pathological
effect on humans. A good example is bubonic and pneumonicplague: the human diseases caused by the bacterium Yersinia
pestis . Y. pestis circulates naturally within populations of a num-
ber of species of wild rodent: for example, in the great gerbil,Rhombomys opimus , in the deserts of Central Asia, and probably
in populations of kangaroo rats, Dipodomys spp., in similar habi-
tats in southwestern USA. (Remarkably, little is known about theecology of Y. pestis in the USA, despite its widespread nature and
potential threat (see Biggins & Kosoy, 2001).) In these species, there
are few if any symptoms in most cases of infection. There are,however, other species where Y. pestis infection is devastating. Some
of these are closely related to the natural hosts. In the USA, pop-ulations of prairie dogs, Cynomys spp., also rodents, are regularly
annihilated by epidemics of plague, and the disease is an import-ant conservation issue. But there are also other species, only very distantly related to the natural hosts, where untreated plague isusually, and rapidly, fatal. Amongst these are humans. Why such a pattern of differential virulence so often occurs – low virulence in the coevolved host, high virulence in some unrelatedhosts, but unable even to cause an infection in others – is an import-ant unanswered question in host–pathogen biology. The issue ofhost–pathogen coevolution is taken up again in Section 12.8.12.3.4 Habitat speciﬁcity within hosts
Most parasites are also specialized to live only in particular 
parts of their host. Malarial parasites live in the red blood cells ofvertebrates. Theileria parasites of cattle, sheep and goats live in
the lymphocytes of the mammal, and in the epithelial cells, andlater in the salivary gland cells, of the tick that is the disease vec-
tor, and so on.
By transplanting parasites experi-
mentally from one part of the host’sbody to another, it can be shown thatmany home in on target habitats.When nematode worms ( Nippostrongylus brasiliensis ) were trans-
planted from the jejunum into the anterior and poster-ior parts of the small intestine of rats, they migrated back to theiroriginal habitat (Alphey, 1970). In other cases, habitat search
may involve growth rather than bodily movement. For instance,loose smut of wheat, the fungus Ustilago tritici , infects the ex-
posed stigmas of wheat ﬂowers and then grows as an extendingﬁlamentous system into the young embryo. Growth continues in the seedling, and the fungus mycelium keeps pace with thegrowth of the shoot. Ultimately, the fungus grows rapidly intothe developing ﬂowers and converts them into masses of spores.
12.3.5 Hosts as reactive environments: resistance,
recovery and immunity
Any reaction by an organism to the
presence of another depends on it recognizing a difference between what is ‘self’ and what is ‘not self’. In invertebrates, populations of phagocytic cells areresponsible for much of a host’s response to invaders, even to 
inanimate particles. In insects, hemocytes (cells in the hemo-lymph) isolate infective material by a variety of routes, especiallyencapsulation – responses that are accompanied by the produc-tion of a number of soluble compounds in the humoral systemthat recognize and respond to nonself material, some of whichalso operate at the midgut barrier in the absence of hemocytes (Siva-Jothy et al. , 2001).
•• ••invertebratesTable 12.1 Specialization in ectoparasites that feed on birds and mammals. (After Price, 1980.)
Percentage of species restricted to:
Scientiﬁc name Common name and lifestyle Number of species 1 host 2 or 3 hosts More than 3 hosts
Philopteridae Bird lice (spend whole life on one host) 122 87 11 2
Streblidae Blood-sucking ﬂies (parasitize bats) 135 56 35 9Oestridae Botﬂies (females ﬂy between hosts) 53 49 26 25Hystrichopsyllidae Fleas (jump between hosts) 172 37 29 34Hippoboscidae Louse ﬂies (are highly mobile) 46 17 24 59
plague: a zoonotic
infection withhumans as accidental hostsparasites may searchfor habitats withintheir hostsEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 352PARASITISM AND DISEASE 353
In vertebrates there is also a phago-
cytic response to material that is not 
self, but their armory is considerablyextended by a much more elaborate
process: the immune response (Figure 12.3). For the ecology of
parasites, an immune response has two vital features: (i) it mayenable a host to recover from an infection; and (ii) it can give a once-infected host a ‘memory’ that changes its reaction if the parasite strikes again, i.e. the host has become immune to reinfection. In mammals, the transmission of immunoglobulins
to the offspring can sometimes even extend protection to the nextgeneration.
For most viral and bacterial infections of vertebrates, the 
colonization of the host is a brief and transient episode in the 
host’s life. The parasites multiply within the host and elicit a strongimmunological response. By contrast, the immune responses eli-cited by many of the macroparasites and protozoan micropara-sites tend to be weaker. The infections themselves, therefore, tendto be persistent, and hosts may be subject to repeated reinfection.
Indeed, responses to micropara-
sites and helminths seem often to bedominated by different pathways within the immune system (MacDonald et al. ,
2002), and these pathways can down-
regulate each other: helminth infection may therefore increase 
the likelihood of microparasitic infection and vice versa (Behnke et al. , 2001). Thus, for example, successful treatment of worm 
infections in patients that were also infected with HIV led to a
signiﬁcant drop in their HIV viral load (Wolday et al. , 2002).The modular structure of plants, the
presence of cell walls and the absence
of a true circulating system (such asblood or lymph) all make any form of immunological responsean inefﬁcient protection. There is no migratory population of phago-
cytes in plants that can be mobilized to deal with invaders. Thereis, however, growing evidence that higher plants possess complexsystems of defense against parasites. These defenses may be con-stitutive – physical or biological barriers against invading organ-isms that are present whether the parasite is present or not – orinducible, arising in response to pathogenic attack (Ryan &Jagendorf, 1995; Ryan et al. , 1995). After a plant has survived a
pathogenic attack, ‘systematic acquired resistance’ to subsequentattacks may be elicited from the host. For example, tobacco
plants infected on one leaf with tobacco mosaic virus can pro-duce local lesions that restrict the virus infection locally, but theplants then also become resistant to new infections not only bythe same virus but to other parasites as well. In some cases theprocess involves the production of ‘elicitins’, which have beenpuriﬁed and shown to induce vigorous defense responses by thehost (Yu, 1995).
Central to our understanding of all
host defensive responses to parasites is the belief that these responses arecostly – that energy and materialinvested in the response must be diverted away from otherimportant bodily functions – and that there must therefore be 
a trade-off between the response and other aspects of the life history: the more that is invested in one, the less can be invested
•• ••Natural (‘nonspecific’) Adaptive
Tissues Lymphocytes Myeloid cellsBlock
Viruses
Some
bacteriaLysis (bacteria)
Some
bacteriaEntry block
neutralization (toxin)
Healing
Injury
Tissue
damageComplement
NKTBAntibody
Specific
antigens
Cytotoxicity (virus)(all bacteria
viruses, etc.)
Cytotoxicity PhagocytosisPMN
MACMast
cellActivation
Presentation
ActivationHelpAcute
inflammation
Chronic
inflammationAdherenceInterferon
LysozymeFigure 12.3 The immune response. 
The mechanisms mediating resistance to
infection can be divided into ‘natural’ or‘nonspeciﬁc’ (left) and ‘adaptive’ (right),each composed of both cellular elements
(lower half ) and humoral elements (i.e.free in the serum or body ﬂuids; upperhalf ). The adaptive response begins when the immune system is stimulated by anantigen that is taken up and processed by amacrophage (MAC). The antigen is a partof the parasite, such as a surface molecule.The processed antigen is presented to Tand B lymphocytes. T lymphocytes respond
by stimulating various clones of cells, someof which are cytotoxic (NK, natural killercells), as others stimulate B lymphocytes toproduce antibodies. The parasite that bearsthe antigen can now be attacked in avariety of ways. PMN, polymorphonuclearneutrophil. (After Playfair, 1996.)
contrasting responses
to micro- andmacroparasitesthe costliness of hostdefensevertebrates: theimmune response plantsEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 353354 CHAPTER 12
in the others. Evidence for this in vertebrates is reviewed by
Lochmiller and Derenberg (2000), who illustrate, for example, theenergetic price (in terms of an increase in resting metabolic rate)paid by a number of vertebrates when mounting an immuneresponse (Table 12.2).
12.3.6 The consequences of host reaction: S-I-R
The variations in mechanisms used by different types of organ-ism to ﬁght infection are clearly interesting and important to parasitologists, medics and veterinarians. They are also import-ant to ecologists working on particular systems, where an understanding of the overall biology is essential. But from the 
perspective of an ecological overview, the consequences for the 
hosts of these responses are more important, both at the whole organism and the population levels. First, these responses determine where individuals are on the spectrum from ‘whollysusceptible’ to ‘wholly resistant’ to infection – and if theybecome infected, where they are on the spectrum from being killed by infection to being asymptomatic. Second, in the case of vertebrates, the responses determine whether an individual still expresses a naive susceptibility or has acquired an immunity
to infection.
These individual differences then determine, for a population,
the structure of that population in terms of the numbers of individuals in the different classes. Many mathematical models of host–pathogen dynamics, for example, are referred to as S-I-R
models, because they follow the changing numbers of suscept-ible, infectious and recovered (and immune) individuals in the popu-lation. The variations at the population level are then crucial in molding the features at the heart of ecology: the distributionsand abundances of the organism concerned. We return to thesequestions of epidemic behavior in Section 12.4.2 and thereafter
in this chapter.
12.3.7 Parasite-induced changes in growth and behavior
Some parasites induce a new programed change in the develop-
ment of the host. The agromyzid ﬂies and cecidomyid and cynipid
wasps that form galls on higher plants are remarkable examples.The insects lay eggs in host tissue, which responds by renewedgrowth. The galls that are produced are the result of a morpho-
genetic response that is quite different from any structure thatthe plant normally produces. Just the presence, for a time, of the parasite egg may be sufﬁcient to start the host tissue into amorphogenetic sequence that can continue even if the develop-ing larva is removed. Amongst the gall-formers that attack oaks(Quercus spp.), each elicits a unique morphogenetic response
from the host (Figure 12.4).
Fungal and nematode parasites of
plants can also induce morphogenetic
responses, such as enormous cellenlargement and the formation of nodules and other ‘deforma-tions’. After infection by the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens ,
gall tissue can be recovered from the host plant that lacks the parasite but has now been set in its new morphogenetic patternof behavior; it continues to produce gall tissue. In this case, theparasite has induced a genetic transformation of the host cells.Some parasitic fungi also ‘take control’ of their host plant and cas-trate or sterilize it. The fungus Epichloe typhina , which parasitizes
grasses, prevents them from ﬂowering and setting seed – the grassremains a vegetatively vigorous eunuch, leaving descendant parasites but no descendants of its own.
Most of the responses of modular
organisms to parasites (and indeed
other environmental stimuli) involvechanges in growth and form, but inunitary organisms the response of hoststo infection more often involves a change in behavior: this oftenincreases the chance of transmission of the parasite. In worm-infected hosts, irritation of the anus stimulates scratching, and parasite eggs are then carried from the ﬁngers or claws to themouth. Sometimes, the behavior of infected hosts seems to maximize the chance of the parasite reaching a secondary hostor vector. Praying mantises have been observed walking to theedge of a river and apparently throwing themselves in, where-upon, within a minute of entering the water, a gordian worm(Gordius ) emerges from the anus. This worm is a parasite of 
terrestrial insects but depends on an aquatic host for part of itslife cycle. It seems that an infected host develops a hydrophiliathat ensures that the parasite reaches a watery habitat. Suicidalmantises that are rescued will return to the riverbank and throwthemselves in again.
•• ••Table 12.2 Estimated energetic costs (percentage increase in
resting metabolic rate relative to controls) made by various
vertebrate hosts when mounting an immune response to a rangeof ‘challenges’ that induce such a response. (After Lochmiller &Derenberg, 2000.)
Species Immune challenge Cost (%)
Human Sepsis 30
Sepsis and injury 57
Typhoid vaccination 16
Laboratory rat Interleukin-1 infusion 18
Inﬂammation 28
Laboratory mouse Keyhole limpet hemocyanin injection 30
Sheep Endotoxin 10–49
galls
(sometimes dramatic)
changes in hostbehaviorEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 354PARASITISM AND DISEASE 355
12.3.8 Competition within hosts
Since hosts are the habitat patches for
their parasites, it is not surprising thatintra- and interspeciﬁc competition,
observed in other species in other habitats, can also be observedin parasites within their hosts. There are many examples of 
the ﬁtness of individual parasites decreasing within a host withincreasing overall parasite abundance (Figure 12.5a), and of theoverall output of parasites from a host reaching a saturation level(Figure 12.5b) reminiscent of the ‘constant ﬁnal yield’ found inmany plant monocultures subject to intraspeciﬁc competition (seeSection 5.5.1).
However, in vertebrates at least, 
we need to be cautious in interpretingsuch results simply as a consequence of
intraspeciﬁc competition for limited
resources, since the intensity of the immune reaction elicited froma host itself typically depends on the abundance of parasites. A rare attempt to disentangle these two effects utilized the avail-ability of mutant rats lacking an effective immune response(Paterson & Viney, 2002). These and normal, control rats weresubjected to experimental infection with a nematode, Strongyloidesratti, at a range of doses. Any reduction in parasite ﬁtness with
dose in the normal rats could be due to intraspeciﬁc competition
and/or an immune response that itself increases with dose; but clearly, in the mutant rats only the ﬁrst of these is possible. In fact, there was no observable response in the mutant rats (Figure 12.6), indicating that at these doses, which were them-selves similar to those observed naturally, there was no evidence
of intraspeciﬁc competition, and that the pattern observed in the
normal rats is entirely the result of a density-dependent immuneresponse. Of course, this does not mean that there is neverintraspeciﬁc competition amongst parasites within hosts, but itdoes emphasize the particular subtleties that arise when anorganism’s habitat is its reactive host.
We know from Chapter 8 that niche differentiation, and espe-
cially species having more effect on their own populations than
on those of potential competitors, lies at the heart of our under-standing of competitor coexistence. We noted earlier that para-sites typically specialize on particular sites or tissues within theirhosts, suggesting ample opportunity for niche differentiation.And in vertebrates at least, the speciﬁcity of the immuneresponse also means that each parasite tends to have its greatestadverse effect on its own population. On the other hand, manyparasites do have host tissues and resources in common; and it
•• ••constant ﬁnal yield?
competition or the
immune response?(a)
(h)
(m) (n) (o) (p) (q) (r) (s)(i) (j) (k) (l)(b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g)
Figure 12.4 Galls formed by wasps of the genus Andricus on oaks ( Quercus petraea , Q. robur ,Q. pubescens or Q. cerris ). Each ﬁgure shows 
a section through a gall induced by a different species of Andricus . The dark colored areas are the gall tissue and the central lighter areas
are the cavities containing the insect larva. (From Stone & Cook, 1998.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 355356 CHAPTER 12
is easy to see that the presence of one parasite species may make
a host less vulnerable to attack by a second species (for example,as a result of inducible responses in plants), or more vulnerable(simply because of the host’s weakened state). All in all, it is nosurprise that the ecology of parasite competition within hosts is
a subject with no shortage of unanswered questions.
None the less, some evidence 
for interspeciﬁc competition amongst parasites comes from a study of twospecies of nematode, Howardula aorony-
mphium and Parasitylenchus nearcticus ,
that infect the fruit-ﬂy Drosophila recens (Perlman & Jaenike, 2001).
Of these, P. nearcticus is a specialist, being found only in D. recens ,
whereas H. aoronymphium is more of a generalist, capable of infect-ing a range of Drosophila species. In addition, P. nearcticus has the
more profound effect on its host, typically sterilizing females,whereas H. aoronymphium seems to reduce host fecundity by only
around 25% (though this itself represents a drastic reduction inhost ﬁtness). It is also apparent that whereas H. aoronymphium is
profoundly affected by P. nearcticus when the two coexist within
the same host in experimental infections (Figure 12.7a), thiseffect is not reciprocated (Figure 12.7b). Overall, therefore, com-petition is strongly asymmetric between the two parasites (as interspeciﬁc competition frequently is; see Section 8.3.3): thespecialist P. nearcticus is both a more powerful exploiter of its host
•• ••interspeciﬁc
competition amongst parasites
Number of offspring per flea
0300
Hatching End of nesting250
200
100
Midnesting1506 founders
20 founders
50 founders 50(a)Mean wet weight of worms (mg)0500
11 6300400
200
100(b)
2 48
Size of infection
Figure 12.5 Density-dependent responses of parasites within
their hosts. (a) The relationship between the number of ﬂeas
Ceratophyllus gallinae (‘founders’) added to the nests of blue tits 
and the number of offspring per ﬂea (mean ± SE). The greater the density, the lower the reproductive rate of the ﬂeas. This
differential increased from an initial assessment at blue tit egghatching, through to the end of the nestling period. (After Tripet& Richner, 1999.) (b) The mean weight of worms per infectedmouse reaches a ‘constant ﬁnal yield’ after deliberate infection at a range of levels with the tapeworm Hymenolepis microstoma .
(After Moss, 1971.)
Reproductive output
110,000
10 10001001000
10(a)
100
Dose (worms)Survivorship
0.011
10 10000.1(b)
100
Dose (worms)
Figure 12.6 Host immune responses are necessary for density
dependence in infections of the rat with the nematode Strongyloides 
ratti. (a) Overall reproductive output increases in line with the initial 
dose in mutant rats without an immune response ( /H17033; slope not
signiﬁcantly different from 1), but with an immune response ( 4) it 
is roughly independent of initial dose, i.e. it is regulated (slope =0.15, 
signiﬁcantly less than 1, P<0.001). (b) Survivorship is independent
of the initial dose in mutant rats without an immune response 
(/H17033; slope not signiﬁcantly different from 0), but with an immune
response ( 4) it declines (slope =−0.62, signiﬁcantly less than 0, 
P<0.001). (After Paterson & Viney, 2002.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 356PARASITISM AND DISEASE 357
(reducing it to lower densities through its effect on fecundity) and
stronger in interference competition. Coexistence between the
species occurs, presumably, because the ﬂy host provides the whole
of both the fundamental and the realized niche of P. nearcticus ,
whereas it is only part of the realized niche of H. aoronymphium .
12.4 Dispersal (transmission) and dispersion 
of parasites amongst hosts
12.4.1 Transmission
Janzen (1968) pointed out that wecould usefully think of hosts as islands
that are colonized by parasites. By using the same vocabulary, this brought host–parasite relationships into the same arena asMacArthur and Wilson’s (1967) study of island biogeography
(see Section 21.5). A human colonized by the malarial parasite isin a sense an inhabited island or patch. The chances of a mosquitovector carrying the parasite from one host to another correspondto the varying distances between different islands. Populations ofparasites are thus maintained by the continual colonization of new host patches as old infected patches (hosts) die or becomeimmune to new infection. The whole parasite population is then
a ‘metapopulation’ (see Section 6.9),with each host supporting a subpopu-
lation of the whole.
Different species of parasite are, of
course, transmitted in different waysbetween hosts. The most fundamental distinction, perhaps, is 
that between parasites that are transmitted directly from host to host and those that require a vector or intermediate host fortransmission. Amongst the former, we should also distinguishbetween those where infection is by physical contact between hostsor by a very short-lived infective agent (borne, for example, incoughs and sneezes), and those where hosts are infected by long-lived infective agents (e.g. dormant and persistent spores).
We are largely familiar, through our own experience, with the
nature of these distinctions amongst animal pathogens; but
essentially the same patterns apply in plants. For example, manysoil-borne fungal diseases are spread from one host plant toanother by root contacts, or by the growth of the fungusthrough the soil from a base established on one plant, which gives it the resources from which to attack another. The honeyfungus Armillaria mellea spreads through the soil as a bootlace-
like ‘rhizomorph’ and can infect another host (usually a woody
tree or shrub) where it meets their roots. In naturally diverse communities, such spread is relatively slow, but when plants occur as ‘continents’ of continuous interplant contacts, there aregreatly increased opportunities for infection to spread. For dis-eases that are spread by wind, the foci of infection may becomeestablished at great distances from the origin; but the rate at whichan epidemic develops locally is strongly dependent on the distancebetween individuals. It is characteristic of wind-dispersed pro-
pagules (spores, but also pollen and seeds) that the distributionachieved by dispersal is usually strongly ‘leptokurtic’: a fewpropagules go a very long way but the majority are deposited closeto the origin.
•• ••hosts as islands
Motherworm size (mm2)
00.4
10.20.3(a)
0.1
070(b)
10305060Offspring numbers
232040
Motherworms per fly29 13
21 1014
200
Treatment8311
4004617
8004011
Figure 12.7 (a) Mean size ± SE (mm2, longitudinal section area) of Howardula aoronymphium motherworms in 1-week-old hosts,
Drosophila recens , in single and mixed infections. Size is a good index of fecundity in H. aoronymphium . The hosts contained either one, 
two or three H. aoronymphium motherworms, having been reared on a diet contaminated with either H. aoronymphium (dark bars) or
mixed infections ( H. aoronymphium and Parasitylenchus nearcticus ; light bars). Size (fecundity) was consistently lower in mixed infections. 
(b) Number of P. nearcticus offspring (i.e. fecundity) ±SE, in single (dark bars) and mixed (light bars) infections. Numbers above the bars
indicate sample sizes of ﬂies; treatment numbers refer to the numbers of nematodes added to the diet. Fecundity was not reduced  in
mixed infections. (After Perlman & Jaenike, 2001.)
direct and indirect
transmission; short-and long-lived agentsEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 357358 CHAPTER 12
12.4.2 Transmission dynamics
Transmission dynamics are in a very real sense the driving force
behind the overall population dynamics of pathogens, but theyare often the aspect about which we have least data (compared,say, to the fecundity of parasites or the death rate of infected hosts).We can, none the less, build a picture of the principles behind
transmission dynamics (Begon et al. , 2002).
The rate of production of new infections in a population, as
a result of transmission, depends on the per capita transmissionrate (the rate of transmission per susceptible host ‘target’) and thenumber of susceptible hosts there are (which we can call S). 
In turn, per capita transmission rate is usually proportional, ﬁrst,to the contact rate, k, between susceptible hosts and whatever 
it is that carries the infection. It also depends on the probability, p, that a contact that might transmit infection actually does so.
Clearly, this probability depends on the infectiousness of the 
parasite, the susceptibility of the host, and so on. Putting thesethree components together we can say:
the rate of production of new infections =k·p·S. (12.1)
The details of the contact rate, k, 
are different for different types oftransmission.
• For parasites transmitted directly from host to host, we deal
with the rate of contact between infected hosts and suscept-
ible (uninfected) hosts.
• For hosts infected by long-lived infective agents that are 
isolated from hosts, it is the rate of contact between these andsusceptible hosts.
• With vector-transmitted parasites we deal with the contact rate
between host and vector (the ‘host-biting rate’), and this goesto determine twokey transmission rates: from infected hosts
to susceptible vectors and from infected vectors to susceptiblehosts.
But what is it that determines the per capita contact rate
between susceptibles and infecteds? For long-lived infective
agents, it is usually assumed that the contact rate is determinedessentially by the density of these agents. For direct and vector-borne transmission, however, the contact rate needs to be brokendown further into two components. The ﬁrst is the contact ratebetween a susceptible individual and allother hosts (direct trans-
mission) or all vectors; we can call this c. The second is then the
proportion of those hosts or vectors that are infectious; we callthis I/N, where Iis the number of infecteds and Nthe total num-
ber of hosts (or vectors). Our expanded equation is now:
the rate of production of new infections =c·p·S·(I/N). (12.2)
We need to try to understand cand I/Nin turn.12.4.3 Contact rates: density- and frequency-dependent
transmission
For most infections, it has often been assumed that the contact
rate cincreases in proportion to the density of the population,
N/A, where Ais the area occupied by the population, i.e. the denser
the population, the more hosts come into contact with oneanother (or vectors contact hosts). Assuming for simplicity that
Aremains constant, the Ns in the equation then cancel, all the
other constants can be combined intoa single constant β, the ‘transmission
coefﬁcient’, and the equation becomes:
the rate of production of new infections =β·S·I. (12.3)
This, unsurprisingly, is known as density-dependent transmission .
On the other hand, it has long been asserted that for sexually
transmitted diseases, the contact rate is constant: the frequency
of sexual contacts is independent ofpopulation density. This time theequation becomes:
the rate of production of new infections =β ′ ·S·(I/N), (12.4)
where the transmission coefﬁcient again combines all the otherconstants but this time acquires a ‘prime’, β′, because the com-
bination of constants is slightly different. This is known as frequency-
dependent transmission .
Increasingly, however, it has become apparent that the
assumed simple correspondence between sexual transmission
and frequency dependence on the one hand, and all other typesof infection and density dependence on the other, is incorrect. Forexample, when density and frequency dependence were comparedas descriptors of the transmission dynamics of cowpox virus, whichis not sexually transmitted, in natural populations of bank voles(Clethrionomys glareolus ), frequency dependence appeared, if any-
thing, to be superior (Begon et al. , 1998). Frequency dependence
appears to be a better descriptor than density dependence, too, fora number of (nonsexually transmitted) infections of insects (Fentonet al. , 2002). One likely explanation in such cases is that sexual
contact is not the only aspect of behavior for which the contactrate varies little with population density: many social contacts,territory defense for instance, may come into the same category.
Secondly, β·S·Iand β′·S·I/N
are themselves increasingly recognized(e.g. McCallum et al. , 2001) as, at best,
benchmarks against which real examples of transmission mightbe measured, rather than exact descriptors of the dynamics; orperhaps as ends of a spectrum along which real transmission termscould be assembled. For example, ﬁtting the term βS
xIyto the
transmission dynamics of granulovirus infection in larvae of the
moth Plodia interpunctella revealed that the best ﬁt was not to ‘pure’ 
density-dependent transmission, βSI, but to β′S1.12I0.14(Figure 12.8).
•• ••the contact ratedensity-dependent
transmission
frequency-dependenttransmission
ends of a spectrumEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 358PARASITISM AND DISEASE 359
In other words, transmission was greater than expected (exponent
greater than 1) at higher densities of susceptible hosts, probablybecause hosts at higher densities were short of food, moved more,and consumed more infectious material. But it was lower thanexpected (exponent less than 1) at higher densities of infectious
host cadavers, probably because of strongly differential susceptib-ility amongst the hosts, such that the most susceptible becomeinfected even at low cadaver densities, but the least susceptibleremain uninfected even as cadaver density increases.
Turning from the contact rate, c, to
the I/Nterm, there has usually been 
a simplifying assumption that this canbe based on numbers from the whole of a population. In reality,
however, transmission typically occurs locally, between nearbyindividuals. In other words, use of such a term assumes eitherthat all individuals in a population are intermingling freely withone another, or, slightly more realistically, that individuals are 
distributed approximately evenly across the population, so that allsusceptibles are subject to roughly the same probability of a con-tact being with an infectious individual, I/N. The reality, however,
is that there are likely to be hot spots of infection in a population,where I/Nis high, and corresponding cool zones. Transmission,
therefore, often gives rise to spatial waves of infection passingthrough a population (e.g. Figure 12.9), rather than simply the
•• ••
Day 6 Day 10 Day 14Transmission coefficient
0.00.5
50.30.4
0.1(a)
0.2
10 15 20
Host density0.00.5
10.30.4
0.1(b)
0.2
23 4
Density of infectious cadaversy = 0.661 x(–0.867)y = 0.253 + 0.007 x
Figure 12.8 Estimating the transmission coefﬁcient at various densities of (a) susceptible hosts and (b) infectious cadavers during the
transmission of a granulovirus amongst moths, Plodia interpunctella , showed that the coefﬁcient appeared to increase with the former and
decrease with the latter. This is contrary to the expectations from density-dependent transmission (an apparently constant coef ﬁcient in
both cases). (After Knell et al. , 1998.)
Figure 12.9 The spatial spread of damping-off disease in a population of radish plants, Raphanus sativus , caused by the fungus Rhizoctonia
solani . Following initiation of the disease at isolated plants (light squares), the epidemic spreads rapidly to neighboring plants (d ark
squares), resulting in patches of damped-off plants (picture on the right). (Courtesy of W. Otten and C.A. Gilligan, Cambridge University.)
local hot spotsEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 359•• ••360 CHAPTER 12
overall rise in infection implied by a global transmission term like
βSI. This illustrates a very general point in modeling: that is, the
price paid in diminished realism when a complex process isboiled down into a simple term (such as βSI). None the less, 
as we shall see (and have seen previously in other contexts) 
without such simple terms to help us, progress in understandingcomplex processes would be impossible.
12.4.4 Host diversity and the spatial spread of disease
The further that hosts are isolated from one another, the more
remote are the chances that a parasite will spread between them.It is perhaps no surprise, then, that the major disease epidemicsknown amongst plants have occurred in crops that are notislands in a sea of other vegetation, but ‘continents’ – large areas
of land occupied by one single species (and often by one singlevariety of that species). Conversely, the spatial spread of an infec-tion can be slowed down or even stopped by mixtures of susceptibleand resistant species or varieties (Figure 12.10). A rather similareffect is described in Section 22.3.1.1, for Lyme disease in the UnitedStates, where a variety of host species that are incompetent intransmitting the spirochete pathogen ‘dilute’ transmission betweenmembers of the most competent species.
In agricultural practice, resistant cultivars offer a challenge to
evolving parasites: mutants that can attack the resistant strain have
an immediate gain in ﬁtness. New, disease-resistant crop varietiestherefore tend to be widely adopted into commercial practice; butthey then often succumb, rather suddenly, to a different race ofthe pathogen. A new resistant strain of crop is then used, and indue course a new race of pathogen emerges. This ‘boom and bust’cycle is repeated endlessly and keeps the pathogen in a continuallyevolving condition, and plant breeders in continual employment.An escape from the cycle can be gained by the deliberate mixingof varieties so that the crop is dominated neither by one virulentrace of the pathogen nor by one susceptible form of the crop itself.
In nature there may be a particular
risk of disease spreading from perennial
plants to seedlings of the same speciesgrowing close to them. If this were
commonly the case, it could contribute to the species richness ofcommunities by preventing the development of monocultures.This has been called the Janzen–Connell effect. In an especiallycomplete test for the effect, Packer and Clay (2000) showed forblack cherry, Prunus serotina , trees in a woodland in Indiana, ﬁrst,
that seedlings were indeed less likely to survive close to their parents (Figure 12.11a). Second, they showed that it was something in the soil close to the parents that reduced survival(Figure 12.11b), though this was only apparent at high seedlingdensity, and the effect could be removed by sterilizing the soil.This suggests a pathogen, which high densities of seedlings, closeto the parent, amplify and transmit to other seedlings. In fact, dyingTime (days)Infected individuals(a)
0400
81 6 12 14300
200
100
46 1 0
(b)
Figure 12.10 The effect of resistant forms in slowing down 
the spread of damping-off epidemics caused by the fungus
Rhizoctonia solani . (a) Progress of epidemics in populations
following the introduction of R. solani into a susceptible
population (radish, Raphanus sativus : 7), a partially resistant
population (mustard, Sinapsis alba : /H17033) or a 50 : 50 mixture of the
two ( /H17009). (b) A simulation showing that when 40% of the plants in
a population are of a resistant variety, the spread of a damping-offepidemic following its introduction can be prevented. Whitesquares are resistant plants, black squares are infected, and graysquares susceptible. Infection can only be transmitted to an
adjacent plant (sharing a ‘side’). Here, the epidemic can spread no further. (Courtesy of W. Otten, J. Ludlam and C.A. Gilligan,Cambridge University.)the Janzen–Connell
effectEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 360••PARASITISM AND DISEASE 361
seedlings were observed with the symptoms of ‘damping off’, 
and the damping-off fungus, Pythium sp., was isolated from dying
seedlings and itself caused a signiﬁcant reduction in seedling survival (Figure 12.11c).
12.4.5 The distribution of parasites within host
populations: aggregation
Transmission naturally gives rise to an ever-changing dispersionof parasites within a population of hosts. But if we freeze the frame(or more correctly, carry out a cross-sectional survey of a popula-tion at one point in time), then we generate a distribution of parasites within the host population. Such distributions are
rarely random. For any particular species of parasite it is usualfor many hosts to harbor few or no parasites, and a few hosts to harbor many, i.e. the distributions are usually aggregated orclumped (Figure 12.12).
In such populations, the mean 
density of parasites (mean number perhost) may have little meaning. In ahuman population in which only one
person is infected with anthrax, the mean density of Bacillus
anthracis is a particularly useless piece of information. A more 
useful statistic, especially for microparasites, is the prevalence of
infection: the proportion or percentage of a host population that
is infected. On the other hand, infection may often vary in sever-
ity between individuals and is often clearly related to the numberof parasites that they harbor. The number of parasites in or on a
particular host is referred to as the intensity of infection. The mean
intensity of infection is then the mean number of parasites per host
in a population (including those hosts that are not infected).
Aggregations of parasites within hosts may arise because indi-
vidual hosts vary in their susceptibility to infection (whether due
to genetic, behavioral or environmental factors), or because individuals vary in their exposure to parasites (Wilson et al. ,
2002). The latter is especially likely to arise because of the localnature of transmission, and especially when hosts are relativelyimmobile. Infection then tends to be concentrated, at least initially,close to an original source of infection, and to be absent in indi-viduals in areas that infection has yet to reach, or where it waspreviously but the hosts have recovered. It is clear, for example,
even without explicit data on the distribution of parasites amongsthosts, that the parasites in Figure 12.9, at any one point in time,were aggregated at high intensities around the wave front – butabsent ahead of and after it.
12.5 Effects of parasites on the survivorship,
growth and fecundity of hosts
According to strict deﬁnition, parasites cause harm to their host.
But it is not always easy to demonstrate this harm, which maybe detectable only at some peculiarly sensitive stage of the host’slife history or under particular circumstances (Toft & Karter, 1990).Indeed, there are examples of ‘parasites’ that feed on a host but
••
Number of germinating seedlings
Probability of seedling 
survival
0 0.00.20.40.60.81.0
100200300400500
Distance to parent (m)25–
3020–
24.9915–
19.9910–
14.995–
9.990–
4.99(a)
Seedling survival (%)
2030405060708090100
Distance to parentClose Far(b)
Low density
High densitySterilized
Unsterilized
Seedling survival (%)100
80
60
40
20
0
TreatmentC1C2P1P2P3(c)
Figure 12.11 (a) The relationship between distance to parent, initial seedling germination ( /H17009) and probability of seedling survival over
time (dashed lines: 7, after 4 months; /H17033, after 16 months); n=974 seedlings from beneath six trees. (b) The effect of distance from parent,
seedling density and soil sterilization on seedling survival when seedlings were grown in pots containing soil collected close to or far 
from their parents. In high-density treatments, survival was signiﬁcantly greater after the soil collected close to the tree wa s sterilized. 
(P<0.0001). (c) Seedling survival in control and pathogen inoculation treatments ( n=40 per treatment). Control 1, potting mix only;
control 2, 5 ml of sterile nutrient-rich fungal growth medium plus potting mix; P1, P2 and P3, three 5 ml replicates of pathogen 
inoculum plus potting mix. Survival was signiﬁcantly lower in pathogen treatments compared with controls after 19 days (X
2=13.8, d.f. =4, P<0.05). (After Packer & Clay, 2000.)
prevalence, intensity
and mean intensityEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 361362 CHAPTER 12
appear to do it no harm. For example, in natural populations of
Australia’s sleepy lizard, Tiliqua rugosa , longevity was either not
correlated or was positively associated with their load of ecto-parasitic ticks ( Aponomma hydrosauri and Amblyomma limbatum ).
There was no evidence that the ticks reduced host ﬁtness (Bull
& Burzacott, 1993).
There are of course, none the less, examples in which a 
detrimental effect of a parasite on host ﬁtness has been demon-strated. Table 12.3, for example, shows one particular compilationof studies in which experimental manipulation of the loads of ani-
mal parasites revealed effects on either host fecundity or survival.(And while an effect on fecundity may seem less drastic than oneon mortality, this seems less to be the case if one thinks of it asthe death of potentially large numbers of offspring.)
On the other hand, the effects of 
parasites are often more subtle than a
simple reduction in survival or fecun-dity. For example, the pied ﬂycatcher
•• ••Hypoendemic
Mesoendemic
HyperendemicPoisson
Negative binomial
ObservedFrequency
≥12 10 200100200300
4
Number of parasites per host(a)
8 6
Cumulative frequency (%)
1000 1002060100
Number of worms per mg skin-snip(b)
100 104080
Figure 12.12 Examples of aggregated distributions of parasite numbers per host. (a) Crayﬁsh, Orconectes rusticus , infected with the
ﬂatworm Paragonimus kellicotti . The distribution is signiﬁcantly different from Poisson (random) ( X2=723, P<0.001) but conforms well
with a ‘negative binomial’, which is good at describing aggregated distributions: X2=12, P≈0.4. (After Stromberg et al. , 1978; Shaw 
& Dobson, 1995.) (b) Distribution of Onchocerca vulvulus worms, which cause onchocerciasis or ‘river blindness’, in human Yanomami
communities in southern Venezuela. Again the distributions, plotted as cumulative frequencies (black lines), conform well to a negative
binomial distribution (colored lines), whether the typical intensity of infection is low (hypoendemic), moderate (mesoendemic) or high
(hyperendemic). (After Vivas-Martinez et al. , 2000.)
Table 12.3 The impact of various parasites on the fecundity and survival of wild animals, as demonstrated through the experimental
manipulation of parasite loads. (After Tompkins & Begon, 1999, where the original references may be found.)
Host
Anderson’s gerbil ( Gerbillus andersoni )
Barn swallow ( Hirundo rustica )
Cliff swallow ( Hirundo pyrrhonota )
European starling ( Sturnus vulgaris )
Great tit ( Parus major )
House martin ( Delichon urbica )
Pearly-eyed thrasher ( Margarops fuscatus )
Purple martin ( Progne subis )
Red grouse ( Lagopus lagopus )
Snowshoe hare ( Lepus americanus )
Soay sheep ( Ovis aries )Parasite
Synoternus cleopatrae (ﬂea)
Ornithonyssus bursa (mite)
Oeciacus vicarius (bug)
Dermanyssus gallinae (mite)
Ornithonyssus sylvarium (mite)
Ceratophyllus gallinae (ﬂea)
Oeciacus hirundinis (bug)
Philinus deceptivus (ﬂy)
Dermanyssus prognephilus (mite)
Trichostrongylus tenuis (nematode)
Obeliscoides cuniculi (nematode)
Teladorsagia circumcincta (nematode)ImpactReduced survival
Reduced fecundityReduced fecundityReduced fecundityReduced fecundityReduced fecundityReduced fecundityReduced fecundityReduced fecundityReduced fecundityReduced survivalReduced survivaleffects are often
subtle . . .EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 362PARASITISM AND DISEASE 363
(Ficedula hypoleuca ) migrates from tropical West Africa to Finland
to breed, and males that arrive early are particularly successful in
ﬁnding mates. Males infected with the blood parasite Trypanosoma
have shorter tails, tend to have shorter wings and arrive in Finlandlate and so presumably mate less often (Figure 12.13). Another
example is provided by lice that feed on the feathers of birds andare commonly regarded as ‘benign’ parasites, with little or no effectson the ﬁtness of their hosts. However, a long-term comparisonof the effects of lice on feral rock doves ( Columba livia ) showed
that the lice reduced the thermal protection given by the feathersand, in consequence, heavily infected birds incurred the costs ofrequiring higher metabolic rates to maintain their body temper-atures (Booth et al. , 1993) and in the time that the birds spent in
preening to keep the lice population under control.
In a similar vein, infection may make hosts more susceptible
to predation. For example, postmortem examination of red grouse
(Lagopus lagopus scoticus ) showed that birds killed by predators 
carried signiﬁcantly greater burdens of the parasitic nematodeTrichostrongylus tenuis than the presumably far more random
sample of birds that were shot (Hudson et al. , 1992a). Alternat-
ively, the effect of parasitism may be to weaken an aggressive competitor and so allow weaker associated species to persist. Forexample, of two Anolis lizards that live on the Caribbean island
of St Maarten, A. gingivinus is the stronger competitor and appears
to exclude A. wattsi from most of the island. But the malarial 
parasite Plasmodium azurophilum very commonly affects A. gingivinus
but rarely affects A. wattsi. Wherever the parasite infects A. 
gingivinus , A. wattsi is present; wherever the parasite is absent, only
A. gingivinus occurs (Schall, 1992). Similarly, the holoparasitic
plant, dodder ( Cuscuta salina ), which has a strong preference for
Salicornia in a southern Californian salt marsh, is highly instru-
mental in determining the outcome of competition betweenSalicornia and other plant species within several zones of the marsh
(Figure 12.14).
These latter examples make an
important point. Parasites often affect
their hosts not in isolation, but through
an interaction with some other factor: infection may make a hostmore vulnerable to competition or predation; or competition orshortage of food may make a host more vulnerable to infectionor to the effects of infection. This does not mean, however, thatthe parasites play only a supporting role. Both partners in the inter-action may be crucial in determining not only the overall strengthof the effect but also which particular hosts are affected.
Organisms that are resistant to parasites avoid the costs of 
parasitism, but, as with resistance to other natural enemies, resist-
ance itself may carry a cost. This was tested with two cultivarsof lettuce ( Lactuca sativa ), resistant or susceptible by virtue of 
two tightly linked genes to leaf root aphid ( Pemphigus bursarius )
and downy mildew ( Bremia lactucae ). The parasites were controlled
by weekly applications of insecticides and fungicides. Resistant formsof lettuce bore fewer axillary buds than susceptibles (Figure 12.15),and this cost of resistance was most marked when the plants weremaking poor growth because of nutrient deﬁciency. In nature, hostsmust always be caught between the costs of susceptibility and thecosts of resistance.
Establishing that parasites have a detrimental effect on host
characteristics of demographic importance is a critical ﬁrst stepin establishing that parasites inﬂuence the population and com-
munity dynamics of their hosts. But it is only a ﬁrst step. A para-site may increase mortality, directly or indirectly, or decrease fecundity, without this affecting levels or patterns of abundance.The effect may simply be too trivial to have a measurable effectat the population level, or other factors and processes may act in
•• ••
Arrival time
530
Noninfected2025
10(a)
15
373310
10
Infected1989
Arrival time
025
Noninfected1520
5(b)
10238 3
8
Infected1990
Proportion of males infected
with Trypanosoma0.5
Early0.30.4
0.1(c)
0.2
Late
Standardized arrival time3231
3435
Figure 12.13 The mean date of arrival (1 =May 1) in Finland of male pied ﬂycatchers ( Fidecula hypoleuca ) infected and uninfected with
Trypanosoma : (a) 1989 and (b) 1990. /H17033, adult males; 7, yearling males. Sample sizes are indicated near the standard deviation bars. (c) The
proportion of males infected with Trypanosoma amongst groups of migrants arriving in Finland at different times. (After Rätti et al. , 1993.)
. . . affecting an
interactionEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 363•• ••SalicorniaHigh Salicornia zone
Strong parasite impact
Strong parasite preferenceStrong asymmetric competitionStrong indirect positive effect
Cuscuta
Salicornia Limonium
Frankenia–+
–Arthrocnemum–Salicornia border
Strong parasite impactStrong parasite preferenceStrong symmetric competitionStrong indirect positive effect
Cuscuta
Salicornia Arthrocnemum–+
–
–Cover (%)
0100
19946080(b)
20
025(c)
5101520(a)
40
Plant mass (g)
1995 1994 1995Arthrocnemum Salicornia
Uninfected InfectedUninfected Infected Frankenia Limonium
Figure 12.14 The effect of dodder, Cascuta salina , on competition between Salicornia and other species in a southern Californian 
salt marsh. (a) A schematic representation of the main plants in the community in the upper and middle zones of the marsh and t he
interactions between them (solid lines: direct effects; dashed lines: indirect effects). Salicornia (the relatively low-growing plant in the ﬁgure)
is most attacked by, and most affected by, dodder (which is not itself shown in the ﬁgure). When uninfected, Salicornia competes strongly
and symmetrically with Arthrocnemum at the Arthrocnemum –Salicornia border, and is a dominant competitor over Limonium and Frankenia
in the middle (high Salicornia ) zone. However, dodder signiﬁcantly shifts the competitive balances. (b) Over time, Salicornia decreased and
Arthrocnemum increased in plots infected with dodder. (c) Large patches of dodder suppress Salicornia and favor Limonium and Frankenia .
(After Pennings & Callaway, 2002.)
Number of buds
0800
Susceptible400600(a)
200
Resistant
Genotype01400
Susceptible400600(b)
200
Resistant
Genotype80010001200
Figure 12.15 The number of buds
produced by resistant and susceptible
genotypes of two cultivars of lettuce, (a) and (b). Error bars are ±2 SE. 
(After Bergelson, 1994.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 364••PARASITISM AND DISEASE 365
a compensatory fashion – for example, loss to parasites may lead
to a weakening of density-dependent mortality at a later stage inthe life cycle. The effects of rare, devastating epidemics, whetherin humans, other animals or plants, are easy to see; but for moretypical, endemic parasites and pathogens, moving from the host-
individual to the host-population level offers an immense challenge.
12.6 The population dynamics of infection
In principle, the sorts of conclusions that were drawn in Chap-
ter 10 regarding the population dynamics of predator–prey and herbivore–plant interactions can be extended to parasites and hosts. Parasites harm individual hosts, which they use as aresource. The way in which this affects their populations varies
with the densities of both parasites and hosts and with the detailsof the interaction. In particular, infected and uninfected hosts can exhibit compensatory reactions that may greatly reduce theeffects on the host population as a whole. Theoretically, a rangeof outcomes can be predicted: varying degrees of reduction in host-population density, varying levels of parasite prevalenceand various ﬂuctuations in abundance.
With parasites, however, there are
particular problems. One difﬁculty is
that parasites often cause a reduction inthe ‘health’ or ‘morbidity’ of their host
rather than its immediate death, and it is therefore usually difﬁcultto disentangle the effects of the parasites from those of other factors with which they interact (see Section 12.5). Anotherproblem is that even when parasites cause a death, this may notbe obvious without a detailed postmortem examination (especiallyin the case of microparasites). Also, the biologists who describethemselves as parasitologists have in the past tended to study thebiology of their chosen parasite without much consideration ofthe effects on whole host populations; while ecologists havetended to ignore parasites. Plant pathologists and medical and vet-erinary parasitologists, for their part, generally study parasites with
known severe effects that live typically in dense and aggregatedpopulations of hosts, paying little attention to the more typicaleffects of parasites in populations of ‘wildlife’ hosts. Elucidationof the role of parasites in host-population dynamics is one of themajor challenges facing ecology.
Here, we begin by looking at the dynamics of infection
within host populations without considering any possible effectson the total abundance of hosts. This ‘epidemiological’ approach(Anderson, 1991) has especially dominated the study of humandisease, where total abundance is usually considered to be deter-mined by a whole spectrum of factors and is thus effectively inde-pendent of the prevalence of any one infection. Infection only affectsthe partitioning of this population into susceptible (uninfected),infected and other classes. We then take a more ‘ecological’approach by considering the effects of parasites on host abundancein a manner much more akin to conventional predator–prey
dynamics.
12.6.1 The basic reproductive rate and the transmission
threshold
In all studies of the dynamics of para-
site populations or the spread of infec-tion, there are a number of particularlykey concepts. The ﬁrst is the basic reproductive rate , R
0. For
microparasites, because infected hosts are the unit of study, thisis deﬁned as the average number of new infections that wouldarise from a single infectious host introduced into a populationof susceptible hosts. For macroparasites, it is the average number
of established, reproductively mature offspring produced by amature parasite throughout its life in a population of uninfectedhosts.
The transmission threshold , which
must be crossed if an infection is tospread, is then given by the conditionR
0=1. An infection will eventually die out for R0<1 (each 
present infection or parasite leads to less than one infection or
parasite in the future), but an infection will spread for R0>1.
Insights into the dynamics of infection can be gained by con-
sidering the various determinants of the basic reproductive rate.We do this in some detail for directly transmitted microparasites,and then deal more brieﬂy with related issues for indirectly
transmitted microparasites, and directly and indirectly trans-mitted macroparasites.
12.6.2 Directly transmitted microparasites: R0and 
the critical population size
For microparasites with direct, density-dependent transmission (see
Section 12.4.3), R0can be said to increase with: (i) the average
period of time over which an infected host remains infectious, L;
(ii) the number of susceptible individuals in the host population,S, because greater numbers offer more opportunities for trans-
mission of the parasite; and (iii) the transmission coefﬁcient, β(see
Section 12.4.3). Thus, overall:
R
0=SβL. (12.5)
Note immediately that by this deﬁnition, the greater the numberof susceptible hosts, the higher the basic reproductive rate of the
infection (Anderson, 1982).
The transmission threshold can
now be expressed in terms of a critical
population size , S
T, where, because R0=1
at that threshold:
••effects on health or
morbidityR0, the basic
reproductive rate
the transmissionthreshold
the criticalpopulation size . . .EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 365366 CHAPTER 12
ST=1/(βL). (12.6)
In populations with numbers of susceptibles less than this, the infec-
tion will die out ( R0<1). With numbers greater than this the infec-
tion will spread ( R0>1). ( STis often referred to as the critical
community size because it has mostly been applied to human ‘com-
munities’, but this is potentially confusing in a wider ecologicalcontext.) These simple considerations allow us to make sense ofsome very basic patterns in the dynamics of infection (Anderson,
1982; Anderson & May, 1991).
Consider ﬁrst the kinds of population
in which we might expect to ﬁnd dif-ferent sorts of infection. If microparasitesare highly infectious (large βs), or give
rise to long periods of infectiousness (large Ls), then they will have
relatively high R
0values even in small populations and will
therefore be able to persist there ( STis small). Conversely, if para-
sites are of low infectivity or have short periods of infectious-
ness, they will have relatively small R0values and will only be
able to persist in large populations. Many protozoan infectionsof vertebrates, and also some viruses such as herpes, are persist-ent within individual hosts (large L), often because the immune
response to them is either ineffective or short lived. A number
of plant diseases, too, like club-root, have very long periods ofinfectiousness. In each case, the critical population size is there-fore small, explaining why they can and do survive endemicallyeven in small host populations.
On the other hand, the immune responses to many other
human viral and bacterial infections are powerful enough toensure that they are only very transient in individual hosts (smallL), and they often induce lasting immunity. Thus, for example,
a disease like measles has a critical population size of around 300,000
individuals, and is unlikely to have been of great importance untilquite recently in human biology. However, it generated majorepidemics in the growing cities of the industrialized world in the18th and 19th centuries, and in the growing concentrations of popu-
lation in the developing world in the 20th century. Around 900,000deaths occur each year from measles infection in the developingworld (Walsh, 1983).
12.6.3 Directly transmitted microparasites: 
the epidemic curve
The value of R0itself is also related to the nature of the epidemic
curve of an infection. This is the time series of new cases follow-
ing the introduction of the parasite into a population of hosts.
Assuming there are sufﬁcient susceptible hosts present for the para-site to invade (i.e. the critical population size, S
T, is exceeded),
the initial growth of the epidemic will be rapid as the parasitesweeps through the population of susceptibles. But as these susceptibles either die or recover to immunity, their number, S,
will decline, and so too therefore will R
0(Equation 12.5). Hence,
the rate of appearance of new cases will slow down and thendecline. And if Sfalls below S
Tand stays there, the infection will
disappear – the epidemic will have ended. Two examples of epidemic curves, for Legionnaires’ disease in Spain and for foot-and-mouth disease in the UK, are shown in Figure 12.16.
Not surprisingly, the higher the initial value of R
0, the more
rapid will be the rise in the epidemic curve. But this will also lead
•• ••
Feb 1Feb 15Mar 1Mar 29Apr 12Apr 26May 10May 24Jun 7 Jul 6Sep 27 Mar 15 Jun 21 Jul 19Aug 2Aug 16Aug 30Sep 13
 Week commencingNumber of premises
060
20(b)
50
3040
10
Jun 26Jun 28Jun 30Jul 4Jul 6Jul 8Jul 10Jul 12Jul 14 Jul 18Jul 19Jul 2Jul 16Number of cases
080
6070
20(a)
50
3040
10
Figure 12.16 (a) An epidemic curve for an outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease in Murcia, a municipality in southeastern Spain, in 2001.
(After García-Fulgueiras et al. , 2003.) (b) An epidemic curve for an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease (mostly affecting cattle and sheep)
in the United Kingdom in 2001. Infected premises (farms) are shown, since infection was transmitted from farm to farm, and once  infected,
all the stock on that farm were destroyed. (After Gibbens & Wilesmith, 2002.). . . for different types
of parasiteEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 366PARASITISM AND DISEASE 367
to the more rapid removal of susceptibles from the popula-
tion and hence to an earlier end to the epidemic: higher valuesof R
0tend to give rise to shorter, sharper epidemic curves. Also,
whether the infection disappears altogether (i.e. the epidemic simply ends) depends very largely on the rate at which new susceptibles either move into or are born into the population, since this determines how long the population remains below S
T.
If this rate is too low, then the epidemic will indeed simply end.But a sufﬁciently rapid input of new susceptibles should prolongthe epidemic, or even allow the infection to establish endemicallyin the population after the initial epidemic has passed.
12.6.4 Directly transmitted microparasites: 
cycles of infection
This leads us naturally to consider thelonger term patterns in the dynamics ofdifferent types of endemic infection. Asdescribed above, the immunity induced
by many bacterial and viral infections reduces S, which reduces
R
0, which therefore tends to lead to a decline in the incidence of
the infection itself. However, in due course, and before the infec-tion disappears altogether from the population, there is likely tobe an inﬂux of new susceptibles into the population, a subsequentincrease in Sand R
0, and so on. There is thus a marked tendency
with such infections to generate a sequence from ‘many suscept-ibles ( R
0high)’, to ‘high incidence’, to ‘few susceptibles ( R0low)’,
to ‘low incidence’, to ‘many susceptibles’, etc. – just like any otherpredator–prey cycle. This undoubtedly underlies the observed cyclicincidence of many human diseases, with the differing lengths of cycle reﬂecting the differing characteristics of the diseases: 
measles with peaks every 1 or 2 years (Figure 12.17a), pertussis(whooping cough) every 3–4 years (Figure 12.17b), diphtheria every4–6 years, and so on (Anderson & May, 1991).By contrast, infections that do not induce an effective immune
response tend to be longer lasting within individual hosts, but also
tend not to give rise to the same sort of ﬂuctuations in Sand R
0.
Thus, for example, protozoan infections tend to be much less vari-
able (less cyclic) in their prevalence.
12.6.5 Directly transmitted microparasites:
immunization programs
Recognizing the importance of critical population sizes alsothrows light on immunization programs, in which susceptible hostsare rendered nonsusceptible without ever becoming diseased(showing clinical symptoms), usually through exposure to akilled or attenuated pathogen. The direct effects here are obvi-
ous: the immunized individual is protected. But, by reducing thenumber of susceptibles, such programs also have the indirect effectof reducing R
0. Indeed, seen in these terms, the fundamental aim
of an immunization program is clear – to hold the number of sus-
ceptibles below STso that R0remains less than 1. To do so is said
to provide ‘ herd immunity ’.
In fact, a simple manipulation of Equation 12.5 gives rise to a
formula for the critical proportion of the population, pc, that needs
to be immunized in order to provide herd immunity (reducingR
0to a maximum of 1, at most). If we deﬁne S0as the typical
number of susceptibles prior to any immunization and note that S
Tis the number still susceptible (not immunized) once the
program to achieve R0=1 has become fully established, then 
the proportion immunized is:
pc=1−(ST/S0). (12.7)
The formula for STis given in Equation 12.6, whilst that for S0,
from Equation 12.5, is simply R0/βL, where R0is the basic repro-
ductive rate of the infection prior to immunization. Hence:
•• ••
Weekly cases of measles (1000s)
045
522030
510
68
Year1948 50 54 56 66 62 58 60 64152540(a)
Cases
06500
5225004500
500
84
Year1948 56 60 80 72 64 68 76150035005500(b)
35
Figure 12.17 (a) Reported cases of
measles in England and Wales from 1948
to 1968, prior to the introduction of massvaccination. (b) Reported cases of pertussis(whooping cough) in England and Wales
from 1948 to 1982. Mass vaccination wasintroduced in 1956. (After Anderson &May, 1991.)
dynamic patterns 
of different types of parasiteEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 367368 CHAPTER 12
pc=1−(1/R0). (12.8)
This reiterates the point that in order to eradicate a disease,
it is not necessary to immunize the whole population – just a 
proportion sufﬁcient to bring R0below 1. It also shows that this
proportion will be higher the greater the ‘natural’ basic reproductive
rate of the disease (without immunization). This general depend-ence of p
con R0is illustrated in Figure 12.18, with the estimated
values for a number of human diseases indicated on it. Note that smallpox, the only disease where in practice immunizationseems to have led to eradication, has unusually low values of R
0
and pc.
12.6.6 Directly transmitted microparasites: frequency-
dependent transmission
Suppose, however, that transmission is frequency dependent(see Section 12.4.3), as it is likely to be, for example, with sexu-ally transmitted diseases, where transmission occurs after aninfected individual ‘seeks out’ (or is sought out by) a susceptibleindividual. Then there is no longer the same dependence on the
number of susceptibles, and the basic reproductive rate is simplygiven by:
R
0=β ′ L. (12.9)
Here, there is apparently no threshold population size and such
infections can therefore persist even in extremely small popula-
tions (where, to a ﬁrst approximation, the chances of sexual con-tact for an infected host are the same as in large populations).12.6.7 Crop pathogens: macroparasites viewed as
microparasites
Most of plant pathology has been concerned with the dynamics
of diseases within crops, and hence with the spread of a diseasewithin a generation. Moreover, although most commonly studied
plant pathogens are macroparasites in the sense we have deﬁnedthem, they are typically treated like microparasites in that disease
is monitored on the basis of some measure of disease severity –often, the proportion of the population infected (i.e. prevalence).We refer to y
tas the proportion affected by lesions at time t, and
hence (1 −yt) is the proportion of the population without lesions
and thus susceptible to infection. It is also usually necessary with
plant pathogens to take explicit account of the latent period, lengthp, between the time when a lesion is initiated and the time when
it becomes infectious (spore-forming) itself, in which state it
remains for a further period l. Hence, the proportion of the popu-
lation affected by infectious lesions at time tis (y
t−p−yt−p−l). The
rate of increase in the proportion of a plant population affected
by lesions (Vanderplank, 1963; Zadoks & Schein, 1979; Gilligan,1990) may thus be given by:
dy
t/dt=D(1−yt)(yt−p−yt−p−l), (12.10)
which is essentially a βSIformulation, with Dthe plant patho-
logists’ version of a transmission coefﬁcient. This gives rise to 
S-shaped curves for the progress of a disease within a crop that broadly match the data derived from many crop–pathogensystems (Figure 12.19).
In the progress of such infections, plant pathologists recognize
three phases.
1The ‘exponential’ phase, when, although the disease is rarely
detectable, rapid acceleration of parasite prevalence occurs. Thisis therefore the phase in which chemical control would be most
effective, but in practice it is usually applied in phase 2. Theexponential phase is usually considered arbitrarily to end at y=0.05; about the level of infection at which a nonspecialist
might detect that an epidemic was developing (the perceptionthreshold).
2The second phase, which extends to y=0.5. (This is sometimes
confusingly called the ‘logistic’ phase, although the wholecurve is logistic.)
3The terminal phase, which continues until yapproaches 1.0.
In this phase chemical treatment is virtually useless – yet it isat this stage that the greatest damage is done to the yield ofa crop.
On the other hand, some crop diseases are not simply trans-
mitted by the passive spread of infective particles from one host
to another. For example, the anther smut fungus, Ustilago violacea ,
is spread between host plants of white campion, Silene alba , by
•• ••PersistenceEradication
RubellaMeasles
Smallpoxpc
01.0
100.60.8
0.20.4
25 40
R00 5 15 20 35 30
Figure 12.18 The dependence of the critical level of vaccination
coverage required to halt transmission, pc, on the basic
reproductive rate, R0, with values for some common human
diseases indicated. (After Anderson & May, 1991.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 368PARASITISM AND DISEASE 369
pollinating insects that adjust their ﬂight distances to compensate
for changes in plant density, such that the rate of transmission iseffectively independent of host density (Figure 12.20a). However,this rate decreases signiﬁcantly with the proportion of the popu-lation that is susceptible: transmission is frequency dependent
(Figure 12.20b), favoring, as we have seen, persistence of the dis-ease even in low-density populations. Of course, this is really justanother case of frequency-dependent transmission in a sexuallytransmitted disease – except that sexual contact here is indirectrather than intimate.
12.6.8 Other classes of parasite
For microparasites that are spread from
one host to another by a vector moregenerally (where the vector does not
compensate for changes in host density as in the above example),the life cycle characteristics of both the host and vector enter into
the calculation of R
0. In particular, the transmission threshold (R0=1) is dependent on a ratio of vector : host numbers. For a
disease to establish itself and spread, that ratio must exceed a 
critical level – hence, disease control measures are usually aimeddirectly at reducing the numbers of vectors, and are aimed onlyindirectly at the parasite. Many virus diseases of crops, and vector-
transmitted diseases of humans and their livestock (malaria,onchocerciasis, etc.), are controlled by insecticides rather than chem-icals directed at the parasite; and the control of all such diseasesis of course crucially dependent on a thorough understanding ofthe vector’s ecology.
The effective reproductive rate of a
directly transmitted macroparasite (nointermediate host) is directly related tothe length of its reproductive period within the host (i.e. again, to
L) and to its rate of reproduction (rate of production of infective
stages). Both of these are subject to density-dependent con-straints that can arise either because of competition between theparasites, or commonly because of the host’s immune response(see Section 12.3.8). Their intensity varies with the distributionof the parasite population between its hosts and, as we have seen,
•• ••
Disease severity (%)
0100
56080
20(a)
40
10 15 25
Days after heating1983
20 0Wheat
Triticale
0100
56080
2040
10 15 251984
20 0WheatTriticaleDiseased plants (%)
0100
86080
20(b)
40
16 24 32
Days after heating0Untreated
Solarized
0100
6080
2040
28 0UntreatedArtificially heated
4 1 22 02 8 81 6 2 4 41 2 2 0Figure 12.19 ‘S-shaped’ curves of the
progress of diseases through crops from 
an initial inoculum to an asymptoticproportion of the total population infected.(a) Puccinia recondita attacking wheat
(cultivar Morocco) and triticale (a crop
derived from the hybridization of wheatand rye) in 1983 and 1984. (b) Fusarium
oxysporum attacking tomatoes in
experiments comparing untreated andsterilized soil and untreated and artiﬁciallyheated soil. (After Gilligan, 1990, in whichthe original data sources and methods ofcurve-ﬁtting may be found.)
vector-borne
infectionsdirectly transmittedmacroparasitesEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 369370 CHAPTER 12
aggregation of the parasites is the most common condition. This
means that a very large proportion of the parasites exist at highdensities where the constraints are most intense, and this tightlycontrolled density dependence undoubtedly goes a long waytowards explaining the observed stability in prevalence of many
helminth infections (such as hookworms and roundworms) evenin the face of perturbations induced by climatic change or humanintervention (Anderson, 1982).
Most directly transmitted helminths have an enormous
reproductive capability. For instance, the female of the humanhookworm Necator produces roughly 15,000 eggs per worm per
day, whilst the roundworm Ascaris can produce in excess of
200,000 eggs per worm per day. The critical threshold densitiesfor these parasites are therefore very low, and they occur and 
persist endemically in low-density human populations, such ashunter–gatherer communities.
Density dependence within hosts also
plays a crucial role in the epidemiologyof indirectly transmitted macroparasites,such as schistosomes. In this case, how-
ever, the regulatory constraints can occur in either or both of thehosts: adult worm survival and egg production are inﬂuenced in a density-dependent manner in the human host; but also, production of infective stages by the snail (intermediate host) isvirtually independent of the number of (different) infective stagesthat penetrate the snail. Thus, levels of schistosome prevalencetend to be stable and resistant to perturbations from outside
inﬂuences.
The threshold for the spread of infection depends directly 
on the abundance of both humans and snails (i.e. a product asopposed to the ratio that was appropriate for vector-transmittedmicroparasites). This is because transmission in both directionsis by means of free-living infective stages. Thus, since it is inap-propriate to reduce human abundance, schistosomiasis is oftencontrolled by reducing snail numbers with molluscicides in an
attempt to depress R
0below unity (the transmission threshold).
The difﬁculty with this approach, however, is that the snails havean enormous reproductive capacity, and they rapidly recolonizeaquatic habitats once molluscicide treatment ceases. The limita-tions imposed by low snail numbers, moreover, are offset to an
important extent by the long lifespan of the parasite in humans(Lis large): the disease can remain endemic despite wide ﬂuc-
tuations in snail abundance.
12.6.9 Parasites in metapopulations: measles
With host–parasite dynamics, as with other areas of ecology, there
is increasing recognition that populations cannot be seen as eitherhomogeneous or isolated. Rather, hosts are usually distributedamongst a series of subpopulations, linked by dispersal betweenthem, and which together comprise a ‘metapopulation’ (see Sec-
tion 6.9). Thus, since the argument has already been made (seeSection 12.4.1) that each host supports a subpopulation and a hostpopulation supports a metapopulation of parasites, host–parasitesystems are typically metapopulations of metapopulations.
Such a perspective immediately changes our view of what 
is required of a host population if it is to support a persistent population of parasites. This is apparent from an analysis of the dynamics of measles in 60 towns and cities in England and Wales from 1944 to 1994: 60 subpopulations comprising an over-
all metapopulation (Figure 12.21) (Grenfell & Harwood, 1997).Taken as a whole, the metapopulation displayed regular cyclesin the number of measles cases and measles was ever-present (Figure 12.21a), at least before widespread vaccination ( c. 1968).
But amongst the individual subpopulations, only the very largestwere not liable to frequent ‘stochastic fade-out’ (disappearance ofthe disease when a few remaining infectious individuals fail to pass
•• ••Number of spores0.20.5
500.3
60
Density of susceptible flowers
per experimental plot100.4
20 30 40(a)
0.20.5
0.60.3
1
Frequency of susceptible flowers0.20.4
0.3 0.4 0.5(b)
0.7 0.8 0.9
Figure 12.20 Frequency-dependent transmission of a sexually transmitted disease. The number of spores of Ustilago violacea deposited per
ﬂower of Silene alba (log10(x+1) transformed) where spores are transferred by pollinating insects. (a) The number is independent of the
density of susceptible (healthy) ﬂowers in experimental plots ( P>0.05) (and shows signs of decreasing rather than increasing with density,
perhaps as the number of pollinators becomes limiting). (b) However, the number decreases with the frequency of susceptibles ( P=0.015).
(After Antonovics & Alexander, 1992.)
indirectly transmitted
macroparasitesEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 370PARASITISM AND DISEASE 371
it on), especially during the cycle troughs: the idea of a critical
population size of around 300,000–500,000 is therefore well supported (Figure 12.21b). Thus, patterns of dynamics may beapparent, and persistence may be predictable, in a metapopula-tion taken as a whole. But in the individual subpopulations, espe-
cially if they are small, the patterns of dynamics and persistenceare likely to be far less clear. The measles data set is unusual inthat we have information both for the metapopulation and indi-vidual subpopulations. In many other cases, it is almost certainthat the principle is similar but we have data only for themetapopulation (and do not appreciate the number of fade-outsin smaller parts of it), or we have data only for a subpopulation(and do not appreciate its links to other subpopulations withinthe larger metapopulation).12.7 Parasites and the population dynamics 
of hosts
A key and largely unanswered question in population ecology is
what role, if any, do parasites and pathogens play in the dynam-ics of their hosts? There are data (see Section 12.5) showing thatparasites may affect host characteristics of demographic import-ance (birth and death rates), though even these data are relatively
uncommon; and there are mathematical models showing that parasites have the potential to have a major impact on the
dynamics of their hosts. But the point was also made earlier thatit is a big step further to establish that dynamics are actually affected.There are certainly cases where a parasite or pathogen seems, by implication, to reduce the population size of its host. The
•• ••
City size (1000s)
21000
1950600800
6(a)
200
1960 1970 1980Cases (1000s)12
1990Fadeouts per year
0.03.0
02.02.5
0.5(b)
1.5
100 200 3001.0
500Year
400
Community size (1000s)400
Figure 12.21 (a) The weekly measles
notiﬁcations for 60 towns and cities in
England and Wales, combined, are shownbelow for the period 1944–94. The verticalline indicates the start of mass vaccination
around 1968. The data for the individualtowns (town size on the vertical axis) are displayed above as a dot for each week without a measles notiﬁcation. (b) Persistence of measles in these towns and cities in the prevaccination era(1944–67) as a function of population size.Persistence is measured inversely as thenumber of ‘fade-outs’ per year, where a
fade-out here is deﬁned as a period of threeor more weeks without notiﬁcation, toallow for the underreporting of cases.(After Grenfell & Harwood, 1997.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 371•• ••372 CHAPTER 12
widespread and intensive use of sprays, injections and medicines
in agricultural and veterinary practice all bear witness to the disease-induced loss of yield that would result in their absence.Data sets from controlled, laboratory environments showingreductions in host abundance by parasites have also been avail-
able for many years (Figure 12.22). However, good evidence fromnatural populations is extremely rare. Even when a parasite is present in one population but absent in another, the parasite-freepopulation is certain to live in an environment that is differentfrom that of the infected population; and it is likely also to be infected with some other parasite that is absent from or of low prevalence in the ﬁrst population. Nevertheless, as we shall see, there are sets of ﬁeld data in which a parasite is strongly implicated in the detailed dynamics of its host, either as a result
of ﬁeld-scale manipulations, or through using data on the effectsof parasites on individual hosts in order to ‘parameterize’ math-ematical models that can then be compared with ﬁeld data.
12.7.1 Coupled (interactive) or modiﬁed host dynamics?
First, an important question, even when an effect of a parasite
on host dynamics has been demonstrated, is whether the host and parasite interact, such that their dynamics are coupled in themanner usually envisaged for ‘predator–prey’ cycles, or whetherthe parasite simply modiﬁes the underlying dynamics of the
host, without there being any detectable feedback between hostand parasite dynamics, and hence without any actual interaction
between the two. This question has been addressed for the datashown in Figure 12.23 for the stored product moth Plodia Population size
050
60025
1200
Time (days)
Figure 12.22 Depression of the population size of the ﬂour
beetle, Tribolium castaneum , infected with the protozoan parasite
Adelina triboli : (/H17039) uninfected, ( /H17009) infected. (After Park, 1948.)
Log (number)3
012
90 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80(a)
Log (number)3
012
90 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80(b)
Log (number)3
012
Time (weeks)90 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80(c)
∆ CV0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Order12345(d)
Pi(GV)
Pi
Pi(Vc)
Vc(Pi)
Figure 12.23 Dynamics of the host moth, Plodia interpunctella
( ) alone (a), in the presence of the parasitoid Venturia
canescens ( ) (b), and in the presence of the Plodia 
interpunctella granulovirus ( ) (c). The series show
representative replicates of each treatment (out of three) for the
ﬁrst 90 weeks of the experiment. (d) Estimating the dimensionalityor ‘order’ of the density dependence of the dynamics for eachtreatment (all replicates), which is predicted to increase with thenumber of interacting elements in the system. The lower the value of ∆CV, the better the ‘ﬁt’; error bars represent 1 SE. The
best-ﬁtting orders (circled) are three for the host alone (Pi) and the host in the presence of the virus (Pi(GV)), but ﬁve for the host in the presence of the parasitoid (Pi(Vc)), and ﬁve too for the parasitoid to which it is coupled (Vc(Pi)). (After Bjørnstad 
et al. , 2001.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 372••PARASITISM AND DISEASE 373
interpunctella and its granulovirus (PiGV) (touched on brieﬂy in
Section 10.2.5). The dynamics of the host in the presence and absence
of the virus are different but only subtly so (Figure 12.23a, c), anddetailed statistical analysis is required to try to understand the difference. Put simply, if host dynamics in infected populations
are driven by an interaction between Plodia and PiGV, then the
‘dimensionality’ of those dynamics (essentially, the complexity ofthe statistical model required to describe them) should be greaterthan those of uninfected populations. In fact, although host fecund-ity was reduced and host development was slowed by the virus,and host abundance was more variable, the dimensionality of thedynamics was unaltered (Figure 12.23d): the virus modulated thevital rates of the host but did not interact with the host nor alterthe underlying nature of its dynamics (Bjørnstad et al. , 2001). By
contrast, when Plodia interacted with another natural enemy, the
parasitoid Venturia canescens , the underlying pattern of ‘genera-
tion cycles’ (see Section 10.2.4) remained intact, but this time the
dimensionality of the host dynamics was signiﬁcantly increased(from dimension 3 to 5): the host and parasite interacted.
12.7.2 Red grouse and nematodes
Next we look at the red grouse – of interest both because it is a
‘game’ bird, and hence the focus of an industry in which Britishlandowners charge for the right to shoot at it, and also becauseit is another species that often, although not always, exhibits regular cycles of abundance (Figure 12.24a). The underlying
cause of these cycles has been disputed (Hudson et al., 1998; Lambin 
et al. , 1999; Mougeot et al. , 2003), but one mechanism receiving
strong support has been the inﬂuence of the parasitic nematode,Trichostrongylus tenuis , occupying the birds’ gut ceca and redu-
cing survival and breeding production (Figure 12.24b, c).
A model for this type of host–macroparasite interaction is
described in Figure 12.25. Its analysis suggests that regular cyclesboth of host abundance and of mean number of parasites per hostwill be generated if:
δ>α k. (12.11)
Here, δis the parasite-induced reduction in host fecundity (relat-
ively delayed density dependence: destabilizing), αis the parasite-
induced host death rate (relatively direct density dependence: 
stabilizing), and kis the ‘aggregation parameter’ for the (assumed)
negative binomial distribution of parasites amongst hosts. Cyclesarise when the destabilizing effects of reduced fecundity outweighthe stabilizing effects of both increased mortality and the aggrega-tion of parasites (providing a ‘partial refuge’ for the hosts) (seeChapter 10). Data from a cyclic study population in the north ofEngland indicate that this condition is indeed satisﬁed. On the other
hand, grouse populations that fail to show regular cycles orshow them only very sporadically are often those in which thenematode cannot properly establish ( S
Texceeds typical host
abundance) (Dobson & Hudson, 1992; Hudson et al. , 1992b).
Such results from models are supportive of a role for the para-
sites in grouse cycles, but they fall short of the type of ‘proof’ 
that can come from a controlled experiment. A simple modiﬁca-
tion of the model in Figure 12.25, however, predicted that if asufﬁcient proportion (20%) of the population were treated for theirnematodes with an anthelminthic, then the cycles would die out.This set the scene for a ﬁeld-scale experimental manipulationdesigned to test the parasite’s role (Hudson et al. , 1998). In two
populations, the grouse were treated with anthelminthics in theexpected years of two successive population crashes; in two others,the grouse were treated only in the expected year of one crash;while two further populations were monitored as unmanipulated
controls. Grouse abundance was measured as ‘bag records’: thenumber of grouse shot. It is clear that the anthelminthic had an effect in the experiment (Figure 12.24d), and it is thereforeequally clear that the parasites normally have an effect: that is,the parasites affected host dynamics. The precise nature of thateffect, however, remains a matter of some controversy. Hudsonand his colleagues themselves believed that the experimentdemonstrated that the parasites were ‘necessary and sufﬁcient’ forhost cycles. Others felt that rather less had been fully demonstrated,suggesting for example that the cycles may have been reducedin amplitude rather than eliminated, especially as the very lownumbers normally ‘observed’ in a trough (1 on their logarithmicscale equates to zero) are a result of there being no shooting when
abundance is low (Lambin et al. , 1999; Tompkins & Begon, 1999).
On the other hand, such controversy should not be seen asdetracting from the importance of ﬁeld-scale experiments ininvestigating the roles of parasites in the dynamics of host populations – nor, indeed, the roles of other factors. For example,a subsequent ﬁeld manipulation supported the alternative hypo-thesis that red grouse cycles are the result of density-dependentchanges in aggressiveness and the spacing behavior of males(Mougeot et al. , 2003). This system is examined again in a general
discussion of cycles in Section 14.6.2.
12.7.3 Svarlbard reindeer and nematodes
Next, we stay with nematodes but switch to a mammal, the
Svarlbard reindeer, Rangifer tarandus plathyrynchus , on the island
of Svarlbard (Spitzbergen), north of Norway (Albon et al. , 2002).
The system is attractive for its simplicity (the effects may be visible, uncluttered by complicating factors): (i) there are no
mammalian herbivores competing with the reindeer for food; (ii) there are no mammalian predators; and (iii) the parasite community of the reindeer is itself very simple, dominated by two gastrointestinal nematodes, neither with an alternative hostand only one of which, Ostertagia gruehneri , has a demonstrable
pathogenic effect.
••EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 373•• ••374 CHAPTER 12
(d)
Year1000
100
10Number shot
1996010,000
92 1987 91 93 90 89 88 94 951000
100
10
010,0001000
100
10
010,000Number shot Number shotMean no. of worms per adult(b)
1.0
0.4
0.20.60.8kwinter loss
10,00001.2
100 1000
Mean worm intensity (1000s)(c)
1Mean brood size at 7 weeks
10010
04 26 8Year(a)
50
20
103040No. of hens per km2
060
82
Mean no. of nematodes per host
10010,000
1000
1976 80 84 86 88 90 78
Figure 12.24 (a) Regular cycles in the abundance (breeding hens per km2) of red grouse ( ) and the mean number of nematodes,
Trichostrongylus tenuis , per host ( ) at Gunnerside, UK. (b) Trichostrongylus tenuis reduces survival in the red grouse: over 10 years
(1980–89) winter loss (measured as a kvalue) increased signiﬁcantly ( P<0.05) with the mean number of worms per adult. (c) T. tenuis
reduces fecundity in the red grouse: in each of 8 years, females treated with a drug to kill nematodes ( /H17033; representing mean values) 
had fewer worms and larger brood sizes (at 7 weeks) than untreated females ( 4). ((a–c) after Dobson & Hudson, 1992; Hudson et al. , 
1992.) (d) Population changes of red grouse, as represented through bag records in two control sites (above), two populations w ith a 
single treatment each against nematodes (middle), and two populations with two treatments each (below). Asterisks represent the  years 
of treatment when worm burdens in adult grouse were reduced by an anthelmintic. (After Hudson et al. , 1998.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 374••PARASITISM AND DISEASE 375
Over a period of 6 years, reindeer were treated with an
anthelminthic each spring (April), and the effect of this on preg-
nancy rates 1 year later, as well as on subsequent calf production,was noted. Infection appeared to have no effect on survival, butuntreated (i.e. infected) females had signiﬁcantly lower preg-
nancy rates, after year-to-year variation had been accounted for(X
12=4.92, P=0.03; Figure 12.26a), an effect that was main-
tained in the data on calf production. The extent of this effect
increased signiﬁcantly with increases in the abundance of the nema-tode in the previous fall ( F
1,4=52.9, P=0.002; Figure 12.26b).
Moreover, the abundance of the nematodes themselves wassigniﬁcantly and positively related to the density of reindeer 2 yearsearlier (Figure 12.26c). Hence, increases in host abundance appearto lead (after a delay) to increases in parasite abundance; increases
in parasite abundance appear to lead (after a further delay) to reductions in host fecundity; and reductions in host fecundity clearlyhave the potential to lead to reductions in host abundance.
In order to ask whether this circle was completed in practice,
such that the parasite didregulate reindeer abundance, these 
various relationships, along with others, were fed as parametervalues into a model of the reindeer–nematode interaction. Results
are shown in Figure 12.26d. Three outcomes are possible: eitherthe reindeer population is driven to extinction, or it showsunbounded exponential growth, or it is regulated to the numbersper square kilometer shown in the ﬁgure. Encouragingly, withinthe observed ranges of calf and old reindeer survival, the modelpredicts reindeer densities very much in line with those observed(around 1–3 km
−2). In the absence of an effect of the nematode
on calf production, the model predicts unbounded growth. Thus,together, ﬁeld experiments and observations, and a mathematical
••b + qH
(Natural death rate)a
(Host birth rate)
H
(Host population)
W
(Free-living
parasite
stages)α
(Parasite-induced death rate)m
(Parasite death rate)δ
(Parasite-inducedreductions inhost fecundity)
β
(Parasite infection rate)
λ (Parasite birth rate)
γ
(Death rate)P
(Adult parasites)
–– =    a – ––    H –    b + qH + ––    HdH
dtδP
HαP
H (())
–– =    λP – γW – βWHdW
dt
–– =    βWH –    m + b + qH + α    1 + – • –––––      PdP
dtP
H(k + 1)
k [ {} ]Figure 12.25 Flow diagram (above)
depicting the dynamics of a macroparasitic
infection such as the nematodeTrichostrongylus tenuis in red grouse, where
the parasite has free-living infective stages;
and (below) the model equationsdescribing those dynamics. Taking theequations in order, they describe: (i) hosts(H) increasing as a result of (density-
independent) births (which, however, arereduced at a rate dependent on the averagenumber of parasites per host, P/H), but
decreasing as a result of deaths – bothnatural (density dependent) and induced 
by the parasite (again dependent on P/H);
(ii) free-living parasite stages ( W) increasing
as a result of being produced by parasitesin infected hosts, but decreasing both as aresult of death and by being consumed byhosts; and (iii) parasites within hosts ( P)
increasing as a result of being consumed by hosts, but decreasing as a result of theirown death within hosts, of the naturaldeath of the hosts themselves and ofdisease-induced death of hosts. This ﬁnalterm is dependent on the distribution ofparasites amongst hosts – here assumed tofollow a negative binomial distribution,parameter k, accounting for the term in
square brackets. (After Anderson & May,1978; Dobson & Hudson, 1992.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 375376 CHAPTER 12
model, provide powerful support for a role of the nematodes in
the dynamics of the Svarlbard reindeer.
12.7.4 Red foxes and rabies
We turn last to rabies: a directly transmitted viral disease of vertebrates, including humans, that attacks the central nervoussystem and is much feared both for the unpleasantness of its symp-toms and the high probability of death once it has taken hold. InEurope, recent interest has focused on the interaction between
rabies and the red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ). An epidemic in foxes spread
westwards and southwards from the Polish–Russian border 
from the 1940s, and whilst the direct threat to humans is almost certainly slight, there is an economically signiﬁcant transmissionof rabies from foxes to cattle and sheep. The authorities in GreatBritain have been especially worried about rabies since the dis-ease has yet to cross the English Channel from mainland Europe,but there has been a strong desire to eliminate rabies from theEuropean mainland too (Pastoret & Brochier, 1999). In this case,
•• ••Treatment effect on
calf production0.3
–0.2–0.10.10.2
O. gruehneri  abundance in fall16,000 15,000 14,000 13,000 12,000 11,000 10,000(b)
0Pregnancy rate1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Year2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 1996(a)
8111527
26462834262465
20,000
15,000
10,000
5000
0
Adult + yearling reindeer density
(km–2) at yeart–22.5 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0(c)O. gruehneri abundance
Calf survival (so)0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
Reindeer of age > 8-year survival ( sold)ExtinctionUnbounded
populationgrowth
1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4(d)
Population regulation3.05.0
2.0
1.0
Figure 12.26 (a) The estimated pregnancy rate in April–May in controls (open bars) and reindeer treated with anthelminthics 12 months
earlier (shaded bars). Numbers over the bars give the sample size of animals with pregnancy status determined. (b) The differen ce in the
calf production of reindeer treated with anthelminthics in the previous April–May and controls, in relation to the estimated Ostertagia
gruehneri abundance in October. (c) The estimated Ostertagia gruehneri abundance in October in relation (curvilinear regression) to adult
and yearling reindeer summer density 2 years earlier at two sites: Colesdalen ( /H17033) and Sassendalen ( 7). Error bars in (a–c) give 95%
conﬁdence limits of the estimates. (d) Summary of the output from a model of the Svalbard reindeer population dynamics, using t he 
range of possible values of annual calf survival and the annual survival of reindeer more than or equal to 8 years old. The bol d lines give
the boundaries between the parameter space where the host population becomes extinct, or is regulated, or shows unbounded growt h.
The dotted lines give the combination of parameter values in the regulated zone that give an average adult +yearling population density
of 1, 2, 3 and 5 reindeer per km2. The crossed bars indicate ranges of estimated values. (After Albon et al. , 2002.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 376PARASITISM AND DISEASE 377
we look at the use of a model, ﬁrst, to capture the observed
host–pathogen dynamics in the ﬁeld (and thus lend credibility tothat model) and then to ask whether those dynamics can usefullybe manipulated. That is: do we know enough about fox–rabiespopulation dynamics to suggest how further spread of the disease
might be prevented and how it might even be eliminated whereit already exists?
A simple model of fox–rabies dynamics is described in Fig-
ure 12.27. This does indeed seem to capture the essence of theinteraction successfully, since, with values for the various biologicalparameters taken from ﬁeld data, the model predicts regularcycles of fox abundance and rabies prevalence, around 4 years inlength – just like those found in a number of areas where rabiesis established (Anderson et al. , 1981).
There are two methods that have a realistic chance of 
controlling rabies in foxes. The ﬁrst is to kill numbers of them
on a continuing basis, so as to hold their abundance below therabies transmission threshold. The model suggests that this isaround 1 km
−2, which is itself a helpful piece of information, given
credence by the ability of the model to recreate observeddynamics. As discussed much more fully in Chapter 15 (in thecontext of harvesting), the problem with repeated culls of this type is that by reducing density they relieve the pressure ofintraspeciﬁc competition, leading to increases in birth rates anddeclines in natural death rates. Thus, culling becomes rapidly moreproblematic the greater the gap between the normal density and
the target density (in this case, 1 km
−2). Culling may, therefore,
be feasible with natural densities of around only 2 km−2. How-
ever, since densities in, for instance, Great Britain often average
5k m−2and may reach 50 km−2in some urban areas, culls of a
sufﬁcient intensity will usually be unattainable. Culling will typically be of little practical use.
The second potential control method is vaccination – in this
case, the placement of oral vaccine in baits to which the foxes are
attracted. Such methods can reach around 80% of a fox popula-tion. Is that enough? The formula for answering this has alreadybeen given as Equation 12.7; the application of which suggeststhat vaccination should be successful at natural fox densities of up to 5 km
−2. Vaccination should therefore be successful, for
example, throughout much of Great Britain, but appears to 
•• ••(Susceptible hosts)a
(Birth rate)
(Diseasetransmissionrate)
b + qN
(Density-dependent death rate)S
(Latently infected hosts)Y
b + qNb + qN
(Disease appearance rate)
(Rabies-induced
death rate)(Infectious hosts)I
dS
dt= aS – (b + qN)S – βSI
dY
dt= βSI – (b + qN + σ)Y
dI
dt= σY – (b + qN + α)I
dN
dt= aS – (b + qN)N – α IFigure 12.27 Flow diagram (above)
depicting the dynamics of a rabies infection
of a vertebrate host (such as the fox) and(below) the model equations describingthose dynamics. Taking the equations in
order, they describe: (i) susceptible hosts(S) increasing as a result of (density-
independent) birth from the susceptibleclass only, but decreasing both as a resultof natural (density-dependent) death andalso by becoming infected through contactwith infectious hosts; (ii) latently infected(noninfectious) hosts ( Y) increasing as a
result of susceptibles becoming infected,
and decreasing both as a result of natural(density-dependent) death and also (as therabies appears) by becoming converted into infectious hosts; and (iii) infectioushosts ( I) increasing as a result of disease
development in latently infected hosts, but decreasing as a result of natural anddisease-induced mortality. Finally, theequation for the total host population (N=S+Y+I) is derived by summing 
the equations for S, Yand I. (After
Anderson et al. , 1981.)EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 377378 CHAPTER 12
offer little hope of control in many urban areas. In fact, more than
20 years after the development of the model in Figure 12.27, rabies has still not spread to Great Britain, and the use of ever-
improving oral vaccines appears to have halted the spread of 
rabies in Europe and indeed eliminated it from Belgium, Luxemb-
ourg and large parts of France (Pastoret & Brochier, 1999).
12.8 Coevolution of parasites and their hosts
It may seem straightforward that 
parasites in a population select for 
the evolution of more resistant hosts, which in turn select for more infective parasites: a classic coevolutionary arms race. In fact, the process is not necessarily so straightforward, although
there are certainly examples where the host and parasite driveone another’s evolution. A most dramatic example involves the rabbit and the myxoma virus, which causes myxomatosis. Thevirus originated in the South American jungle rabbit Sylvilagus
brasiliensis , where it causes a mild disease that only rarely kills the
host. The South American virus, however, is usually fatal whenit infects the European rabbit Oryctolagus cuniculus. In one of the
greatest examples of the biological control of a pest, the myxomavirus was introduced into Australia in the 1950s to control the
European rabbit, which had become a pest of grazing lands. Thedisease spread rapidly in 1950–51, and rabbit populations weregreatly reduced – by more than 90% in some places. At the sametime, the virus was introduced to England and France, and theretoo it resulted in huge reductions in the rabbit populations. Theevolutionary changes that then occurred in Australia were followedin detail by Fenner and his associates (Fenner & Ratcliffe, 1965;
Fenner, 1983) who had the brilliant research foresight to estab-lish baseline genetic strains of both the rabbits and the virus. Theyused these to measure subsequent changes in the virulence of thevirus and the resistance of the host as they evolved in the ﬁeld.
When the disease was ﬁrst introduced to Australia it killed more
than 99% of infected rabbits. This ‘case mortality’ fell to 90% within
1 year and then declined further (Fenner & Ratcliffe, 1965). Thevirulence of isolates of the virus sampled from the ﬁeld was gradedaccording to the survival time and the case mortality of controlrabbits. The original, highly virulent virus (1950–51) was gradeI, which killed 99% of infected laboratory rabbits. Already by 1952most of the virus isolates from the ﬁeld were the less virulent gradesIII and IV. At the same time, the rabbit population in the ﬁeld wasincreasing in resistance. When injected with a standard grade III
strain of the virus, ﬁeld samples of rabbits in 1950–51 had a casemortality of nearly 90%, which had declined to less than 30% only8 years later (Marshall & Douglas, 1961) (Figure 12.28).
This evolution of resistance in the European rabbit is easy to
understand: resistant rabbits are obviously favored by natural selec-tion in the presence of the myxoma virus. The case of the virus,however, is subtler. The contrast between the virulence of themyxoma virus in the European rabbit and its lack of virulence 
in the American host with which it had coevolved, combined with the attenuation of its virulence in Australia and Europe afterits introduction, ﬁt a commonly held view that parasites evolvetoward becoming benign to their hosts in order to prevent theparasite eliminating its host and thus eliminating its habitat. Thisview, however, is quite wrong. The parasites favored by naturalselection are those with the greatest ﬁtness (broadly, the greatest
•• ••Proportions (%)1950–51
V IV II0I100
III
Virulence grade(a) Australia
0
100
1975–811952–55
1955–58
1959–63
1964–661967–69
1970–74
V IV II0I100
III(b) Britain
0
100
1976–801953
1962
1975Figure 12.28 (a) The percentages in
which various grades of myxoma virus
have been found in wild populations ofrabbits in Australia at different times from1951 to 1981. Grade I is the most virulent.
(After Fenner, 1983.) (b) Similar data forwild populations of rabbits in Great Britainfrom 1953 to 1980. (After May &Anderson, 1983; from Fenner, 1983.)myxomatosisEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 378PARASITISM AND DISEASE 379
reproductive rate). Sometimes this is achieved through a decline
in virulence, but sometimes it is not. In the myxoma virus, aninitial decline in virulence was indeed favored – but furtherdeclines were not.
The myxoma virus is blood-borne and is transmitted from host
to host by blood-feeding insect vectors. In Australia in the ﬁrst
20 years after its introduction, the main vectors were mosquitoes(especially Anopheles annulipes ), which feed only on live hosts. The
problem for grade I and II viruses is that they kill the host so quicklythat there is only a very short time in which the mosquito cantransmit them. Effective transmission may be possible at very highhost densities, but as soon as densities decline, it is not. Hence,there was selection against grades I and II and in favor of less viru-lent grades, giving rise to longer periods of host infectiousness.
At the other end of the virulence scale, however, the mosquitoesare unlikely to transmit grade V of the virus because it producesvery few infective particles in the host skin that could contami-nate the vectors’ mouthparts. The situation was complicated in the late 1960s when an alternative vector of the disease, therabbit ﬂea Spilopsyllus cuniculi (the main vector in England), was
introduced to Australia. There is some evidence that more viru-lent strains of the virus may be favored when the ﬂea is the mainvector (see discussion in Dwyer et al. , 1990).
Overall, then, there has been selection in the rabbit–
myxomatosis system not for decreased virulence as such, but for increased transmissibility (and hence increased ﬁtness) – 
which happens in this system to be maximized at intermediate
grades of virulence. Many parasites of insects rely on killing theirhost for effective transmission. In these, very high virulence isfavored. In yet other cases, natural selection acting on parasiteshas clearly favored very low virulence: for example, the humanherpes simplex virus may do very little tangible harm to its hostbut effectively gives it lifelong infectiousness. These differencesreﬂect differences in the underlying host–parasite ecologies, butwhat the examples have in common is that there has been evolution toward increased parasite ﬁtness.
In other cases, coevolution is more
deﬁnitely antagonistic: increased resist-ance in the host and increased infectivityin the parasite. A classic example is the
interaction between agricultural plants and their pathogens (Burdon,1987), although in this case the resistant hosts are often introducedby human intervention. There may even be gene-for-gene match-ing, with a particular virulence allele in the pathogen selectingfor a resistant allele in the host, which in turn selects for allelesother than the original allele in the pathogen, and so on. This,moreover, may give rise to polymorphism in the parasite and host,either as a result of different alleles being favored in different sub-populations, or because several alleles are simultaneously in a stateof ﬂux within their population, each being favored when they (andtheir matching allele in the other partner) is rare. In fact, suchdetailed processes have proved difﬁcult to observe, but this hasbeen done with a system comprising the bacterium Pseudomonas
ﬂuorescens and its viral parasite, the bacteriophage (or phage)
SBW25 φ2 (Buckling & Rainey, 2002).
Changes in both the host and parasite were monitored over
evolutionary time, as 12 replicate coexisting populations of bac-terium and phage were transferred from culture bottle to culturebottle. It is apparent that the bacteria became generally more resist-ant to the phage at the same time as the phage became gener-ally more infective to the bacteria (Figure 12.29): each was beingdriven by the directional selection of an arms race. But this wasonly apparent because any given bacterial strain (from one of the12 replicates) was tested against all 12 phage strains, and the phagestrains were tested similarly. When, at the end of the experiment(Table 12.4), the resistance of each bacterial strain was tested againsteach phage strain in turn, it was clear that the bacteria were almostalways most resistant (and often wholly resistant) to the phage 
strain with which they coevolved. There was therefore extensiveevolutionary divergence amongst the strains – or subpopulations– and extensive polymorphism within the metapopulation as a whole.
Thus we close this chapter, appropriately, with another reminder
that despite being relatively neglected by ecologists in the past,parasites are increasingly being recognized as major players in boththe ecological and the evolutionary dynamics of their hosts.
•• ••Figure 12.29 (a) Over evolutionary time (1 ‘transfer’ ≈8 bacterial
generations) bacterial resistance to phage increased in each of 12
bacterial replicates. ‘Mean’ resistance was the mean calculated overthe 12 phage isolates from the respective time points. (b) Similarly,phage infectivity increased, where ‘mean’ infectivity was calculated
over the 12 bacterial replicates. (After Buckling & Rainey, 2002.)
Mean resistance1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
50 40 30 20 10 0(a)
Mean infectivity0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
50 40 30 20 10 0(b)
Transfer number
bacteria and
bacteriophagesEIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 379380 CHAPTER 12
Summary
We begin by deﬁning parasite, infection, pathogen and disease.
The diversity of animal and plant parasites is then outlined,based on the distinctions between micro- and macroparasitesand between those with direct and those with indirect (vectored)life cycles. The particular case of social and brood parasites (e.g.
cuckoos) is also described.
We explain the difference between biotrophic and necro-
trophic parasites (pioneer saprotrophs), and we use a discussionof zoonoses (wildlife infections transmissible to man) to illustratethe nature of host speciﬁcity amongst parasites.
Hosts are reactive environments: they may resist, or recover,
or (in vertebrates) acquire immunity. We describe the contrast-ing responses in vertebrates to micro- and macroparasites and contrast these in turn with the responses of plants to infection.
The costliness of host defense against attack is emphasized.Parasites may also induce profound changes in host growth andbehavior.
We explain why it may be difﬁcult to distinguish the effects of
intraspeciﬁc competition amongst parasites from parasite density-dependent host immune responses, and that patterns associatedwith interspeciﬁc competition are as observable amongst parasitesas they are in other organisms.
The distinctions between different types of parasite transmission
are outlined and a formal description of transmission dynamicsis developed, using the form of the contact rate to distinguishbetween density- and frequency-dependent transmission, thoughit is emphasized that these may merely be ends of a spectrum.
There may also be great spatial variation in the speed withwhich infection spreads, either as a result of infectious foci orbecause of spatial mixtures of susceptible and resistant species 
or varieties.
The distribution of parasites within host populations is usually
aggregated. This makes it especially important to understand thedistinctions between prevalence, intensity and mean intensity.
We discuss the effects of parasites on the survivorship, growth
and fecundity of hosts. The effects are often subtle, affecting, for
example, interactions of hosts with other species.
We then examine the dynamics of infection within host popu-
lations. Key concepts here are the basic reproductive rate, R
0, the
transmission threshold ( R0=1) and the critical population size.
These form a framework for directly transmitted microparasites
that sheds light on the kinds of population in which we mightexpect to ﬁnd different sorts of infection, on the nature of the epidemic curve of an infection, on the dynamic patterns of 
different types of parasite, and on the planning of immunizationprograms based on the principle of ‘herd immunity’.
The dynamics are also outlined of pathogens attacking crops,
of vector-borne infections and macroparasites, and of parasitesinfecting metapopulations of hosts.
We examine the role that parasites and pathogens play in the
dynamics of their hosts. We address ﬁrst the question of whetherhost and parasite dynamics are coupled, or whether the parasitesimply modiﬁes the underlying dynamics of the host, without there
being any detectable feedback. A series of case studies then em-phasizes that data supporting a role for parasites in the dynamicsof their hosts are sparse and often liable to alternative interpretations.
Finally, we consider the coevolution of parasites and their hosts,
stressing the absence of any ‘cosy accommodation’, but rather thatthe selective pressures in both cases – parasite and host – favormaximizing individual ﬁtness.
••Table 12.4 For each of 12 bacterial replicates (B1–B12) and their 12 respective phage replicates ( φ1–φ12), entries in the table are the
proportion of bacteria resistant to the phage at the end of a period of coevolution (50 transfers ≈400 bacterial generations). Coevolving
pairs are shown along the diagonal in bold. Note that bacterial strains are usually most resistant to the phage strain with whi ch they
coevolved. (After Buckling & Rainey, 2002.)
Bacterial replicates
Phage replicates B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B10 B11 B12
f1 0.8 0.9 1 1 1 1 1 1 0.85 0.85 0.75 0.65
f2 0.1 1 0.3 1 0.85 0.25 1 1 0.85 0.9 0.8 0.65
f3 0.75 0.75 1 1 1 0.9 1 1 0.85 0.9 0.9 0.65
f4 0.15 0.9 0.8 1 0.85 0.6 0.6 1 0.85 1 0.85 0.35
f5 0.25 0.9 1 1 1 0.9 1 0.8 0.85 1 0.8 0.65
f6 0.2 1 0.85 0.8 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.85 0.75 0.45 0.25
f7 0.2 0.75 0.6 1 0.4 0.45 1 0.9 0.85 1 0.75 0.35
f8 0 0.95 0.55 0.95 0.35 0.25 0.8 1 0.85 1 0.7 0.25
f9 0 0.7 0.55 0.45 0.7 0.35 1 1 0.85 1 0.5 0.1
f10 0 0.7 0.9 0.7 0.55 0.9 1 1 0.7 1 0.5 0.4
f11 0 0.5 0.9 0.75 0.7 1 1 0.95 0.75 1 1 0.35
f12 0 0.15 0 0.1 0.65 0.35 1 1 0.7 0.8 0.85 0.4EIPC12  10/24/05  2:05 PM  Page 380••13.1 Introduction: symbionts, mutualists,
commensals and engineers
No species lives in isolation, but often the association with
another species is especially close: for many organisms, the habitatthey occupy is an individual of another species. Parasites live withinthe body cavities or even the cells of their hosts; nitrogen-ﬁxingbacteria live in nodules on the roots of leguminous plants; and
so on. Symbiosis (‘living together’) is the term that has been coinedfor such close physical associations between species, in which a‘symbiont’ occupies a habitat provided by a ‘host’.
In fact, parasites are usually excluded from the category of sym-
bionts, which is reserved instead for interactions where there isat least the suggestion of ‘mutualism’. A mutualistic relationshipis simply one in which organisms of different species interact totheir mutual beneﬁt. It usually involves the direct exchange ofgoods or services (e.g. food, defense or transport) and typically
results in the acquisition of novel capabilities by at least one part-ner (Herre et al. , 1999). Mutualism, therefore, need not involve
close physical association: mutualists need not be symbionts. Forexample, many plants gain dispersal of their seeds by offering areward to birds or mammals in the form of edible ﬂeshy fruits,and many plants assure effective pollination by offering a resourceof nectar in their ﬂowers to visiting insects. These are mutualisticinteractions but they are not symbioses.
It would be wrong, however, to
see mutualistic interactions simply asconﬂict-free relationships from whichnothing but good things ﬂow for bothpartners. Rather, current evolutionary
thinking views mutualisms as cases of reciprocal exploitation
where, none the less, each partner is a netbeneﬁciary (Herre &
West, 1997).
Nor are interactions in which one species provides the habitat
for another necessarily either mutualistic (both parties beneﬁt: ‘++’) or parasitic (one gains, one suffers: ‘ +−’). In the ﬁrst place,
it may simply not be possible to establish, with solid data, that each
of the participants either beneﬁts or suffers. In addition, though,there are many ‘interactions’ between two species in which theﬁrst provides a habitat for the second, but there is no real suspi-cion that the ﬁrst either beneﬁts or suffers in any measurable wayas a consequence. Trees, for example, provide habitats for the many
species of birds, bats and climbing and scrambling animals that
are absent from treeless environments. Lichens and mossesdevelop on tree trunks, and climbing plants such as ivy, vines andﬁgs, though they root in the ground, use tree trunks as supportto extend their foliage up into a forest canopy. Trees are there-fore good examples of what have been called ecological orecosystem ‘engineers’ ( Jones et al. , 1994). By their very presence,
they create, modify or maintain habitats for others. In aquatic communities, the solid surfaces of larger organisms are evenmore important contributors to biodiversity. Seaweeds and kelps
normally grow only where they can be anchored on rocks, but their fronds are colonized in turn by ﬁlamentous algae, bytube-forming worms ( Spirorbis ) and by modular animals such as
hydroids and bryozoans that depend on seaweeds for anchorageand access to resources in the moving waters of the sea.
More generally, many of these are likely to be examples of 
commensal ‘interactions’ (one partner gains, the other is neitherharmed nor beneﬁts: ‘ +0’). Certainly, those cases where the
harm to the host of a ‘parasite’ or the beneﬁt to a ‘mutualist’ cannot be established should be classiﬁed as commensal or‘host–guest’, bearing in mind that, like guests under other circum-stances, they may be unwelcome when the hosts are ill or dis-tressed! Commensals have received far less study than parasites
and mutualists, though many of them have ways of life that arequite as specialized and fascinating.
Mutualisms themselves have often been neglected in the past
compared to other types of interaction, yet mutualists composemost of the world’s biomass. Almost all the plants that dominate
mutualism: reciprocal
exploitation not acosy partnership
Chapter 13
Symbiosis and MutualismEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 381••382 CHAPTER 13
grasslands, heaths and forests have roots that have an intimate
mutualistic association with fungi. Most corals depend on the unicellular algae within their cells, many ﬂowering plants needtheir insect pollinators, and many animals carry communities ofmicroorganisms within their guts that they require for effective
digestion.
The rest of this chapter is organised as a progression. We start
with mutualisms in which no intimate symbiosis is involved. Rather,the association is largely behavioral: that is, each partner behavesin a manner that confers a net beneﬁt on the other. By Sec-tion 13.5, when we discuss mutualisms between animals and themicrobiota living in their guts, we will have moved on to closerassociations (one partner living within the other), and in Sections13.6–13.10 we examine still more intimate symbioses in which one
partner enters between or within another’s cells. In Section 13.11we interrupt the progression to look brieﬂy at mathematicalmodels of mutualisms. Then, ﬁnally, in Section 13.12 – for 
completeness, though the subject is not strictly ‘ecological’ – weexamine the idea that various organelles have entered into suchintimate symbioses within the cells of their many hosts that it hasceased to be sensible to regard them as distinct organisms.
13.2 Mutualistic protectors
13.2.1 Cleaner and client ﬁsh
‘Cleaner’ ﬁsh, of which at least 45 species have been recognized,feed on ectoparasites, bacteria and necrotic tissue from the bodysurface of ‘client’ ﬁsh. Indeed, the cleaners often hold territorieswith ‘cleaning stations’ that their clients visit – and visit more oftenwhen they carry many parasites. The cleaners gain a food source
••0.01.0
0.8
0.60.4
0.2
16 7
Reef81 4 1 50.01.0
0.8
0.60.4
0.20.01.0
0.8
0.60.4
0.2
–4020
0
–20
Combined Natural Experimental*******Cleaner fish
No cleaner fish(b)Gnathiids per fish(a)
Change in species diversity (%)Cleaner goneGnathiids per fish Gnathiids per fish
–2060
0
Combined Natural Experimental** ****
40
20**(c)
Change in species diversity (%)New cleaner
Figure 13.1 (a) Cleaner ﬁsh really do clean their clients. The mean number of gnathiid parasites per client ( Hemigymnus melapterus ) 
at ﬁve reefs, from three of which (14, 15 and 16) the cleaners ( Labroides dimidiatus ) were experimentally removed. In a ‘long-term’
experiment, clients without cleaners had more parasites after 12 days (upper panel: F=17.6, P=0.02). In a ‘short-term’ experiment, clients
without cleaners did not have signiﬁcantly more parasites at dawn after 12 h (middle panel: F=1.8, P=0.21), presumably because cleaners
do not feed at night, but the difference was signiﬁcant after a further 12 h of daylight (lower panel: F=11.6, P=0.04). Bars represent
standard errors. (After Grutter, 1999.) (b) Cleaners increase reef ﬁsh diversity. The percentage change in the number of ﬁsh sp ecies present
following natural or experimental loss of a cleaner ﬁsh, L. dimidiatus , from a reef patch (or the two treatments combined), in the short
term (2–4 weeks, light bars) and the long term (4–20 months, dark bars). (c) The percentage change in the number of ﬁsh species  present
following natural or experimental immigration of a cleaner ﬁsh, L. dimidiatus , into a reef patch (or the two treatments combined), in the
short term (2–4 weeks, light bars) and the long term (4–20 months, dark bars). The columns and error bars represent medians and
interquartiles. *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01; ***, P<0.001. (After Bshary, 2003.)EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 382••SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 383
and the clients are protected from infection. In fact, it has not always
proved easy to establish that the clients beneﬁt, but in experimentsoff Lizard Island on Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, Grutter (1999)was able to do this for the cleaner ﬁsh, Labroides dimidiatus , which
eats parasitic gnathiid isopods from its client ﬁsh, Hemigymnus
melapterus . Clients had signiﬁcantly (3.8 times) more parasites 
12 days after cleaners were excluded from caged enclosures
(Figure 13.1a, top panel); but even in the short term (up to 1 day),although removing cleaners, which only feed during daylight, hadno effect when a check was made at dawn (middle panel), thisled to there being signiﬁcantly (4.5 times) more parasites follow-ing a further day’s feeding (lower panel).
Moreover, further experiments using
the same cleaner ﬁsh, but at a Red 
Sea reef in Egypt, emphasized thecommunity-wide importance of these
cleaner–client interactions (Bshary, 2003). When cleaners eitherleft a reef patch naturally (so the patch had no cleaner) or wereexperimentally removed, the local diversity (number of species)of reef ﬁsh dropped dramatically, though this was only signiﬁcantafter 4–20 months, not after 2–4 weeks (Figure 13.1b). However,when cleaners either moved into a cleanerless patch naturally orwere experimentally added, diversity increased signiﬁcantly evenwithin a few weeks (Figure 13.1c). Intriguingly, these effectsapplied not only to client species but to nonclients too.
In fact, several behavioral mutualisms are found amongst the
inhabitants of tropical coral reefs (where the corals themselves
are mutualists – see Section 13.7.1). The clown ﬁsh ( Amphiprion ),
for example, lives close to a sea anemone (e.g. Physobrachia ,
Radianthus ) and retreats amongst the anemone’s tentacles when-
••effects at the
community level, too
Figure 13.2 Structures of the Bull’s horn
acacia ( Acacia cornigera ) that attract its ant
mutualist. (a) Protein-rich Beltian bodies at
the tips of the leaﬂets (© Oxford ScientiﬁcFilms/Michael Fogden). (b) Hollow thorns
used by the ants as nesting sites (© VisualsUnlimited/C. P. Hickman).(a) (b)ever danger threatens. Whilst within the anemone, the ﬁsh gains
a covering of mucus that protects it from the anemone’s sting-ing nematocysts (the normal function of the anemone slime is toprevent discharge of nematocysts when neighboring tentaclestouch). The ﬁsh derives protection from this relationship, but 
the anemone also beneﬁts because clown ﬁsh attack other ﬁshthat come near, including species that normally feed on the seaanemones.
13.2.2 Ant–plant mutualisms
The idea that there are mutualistic relationships between plants
and ants was put forward by Belt (1874) after observing thebehavior of aggressive ants on species of Acacia with swollen thorns
in Central America. This relationship was later described morefully by Janzen (1967) for the Bull’s horn acacia ( Acacia cornigera )
and its associated ant, Pseudomyrmex ferruginea. The plant bears
hollow thorns that are used by the ants as nesting sites; its leaves
have protein-rich ‘Beltian bodies’ at their tips (Figure 13.2) whichthe ants collect and use for food; and it has sugar-secreting nectaries on its vegetative parts that also attract the ants. The ants,for their part, protect these small trees from competitors byactively snipping off shoots of other species and also protect theplant from herbivores – even large (vertebrate) herbivores maybe deterred.
In fact, ant–plant mutualisms
appear to have evolved many times
(even repeatedly in the same family ofplants); and nectaries are present on
do the plants
beneﬁt?EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 383••384 CHAPTER 13
the vegetative parts of plants of at least 39 families and in many
communities throughout the world. Nectaries on or in ﬂowersare easily interpreted as attractants for pollinators. But the roleof extraﬂoral nectaries on vegetative parts is less easy to establish.They clearly attract ants, sometimes in vast numbers, but care-
fully designed and controlled experiments are necessary to showthat the plants themselves beneﬁt, such as the study of theAmazonian canopy tree Tachigali myrmecophila , which harbors the
stinging ant Pseudomyrmex concolor in specialized hollowed-out struc-
tures (Figure 13.3). The ants were removed from selected plants;these then bore 4.3 times as many phytophagous insects as con-
trol plants and suffered much greater herbivory. Leaves on plantsthat carried a population of ants lived more than twice as longas those on unoccupied plants and nearly 1.8 times as long as thoseon plants from which ants had been deliberately removed.
Mutualistic relationships, in this case
between individual ant and plant spe-
cies, should not, however, be viewed inisolation – a theme that will recur in thischapter. Palmer et al. (2000), for example, studied competition
••N0.00.51.53.0
M
19882.5
2.0
1.0Bottom leaves
SJM J SJ N
1990 1989
Leaf longevity (months)
02060100(b)
80
40
Control
(20)Unoccupied
(17)Experimental
(22)Herbivory level
N0.00.51.53.0
M
1988(a)
2.5
2.0
1.0Top leaves
SJM J SJ N
1990 1989
Month Treatments
Figure 13.3 (a) The intensity of leaf herbivory on plants of Tachigali myrmecophila naturally occupied by the ant Pseudomyrmex concolor 
(/H17033, n=22) and on plants from which the ants had been experimentally removed ( /H17033, n=23). Bottom leaves are those present at the start 
of the experiment and top leaves are those emerging subsequently. (b) The longevity of leaves on plants of T. myrmecophila occupied by 
P. concolor (control) and from which the ants were experimentally removed or from which the ants were naturally absent. Error bars ±
standard error. (After Fonseca, 1994.)
competition amongst
mutualistic antsRelative growth increment (m)
–0.080.06(b)
Versus hierarchy
Transition typeWith hierarchy0.02
–0.02
–0.060.04
0.00
–0.04Average growth increment (m)
–0.020.06(a)
With ants No ants0.04
0.020.00
OccupantFigure 13.4 (a) Average growth
increment was signiﬁcantly greater 
(P<0.0001) for Acacia drepanolobium trees
continually occupied by ants ( n=651) 
than for uninhabited trees ( n=126).
‘Continually occupied’ trees were occupied
by ant colonies at both an initial surveyand one 6 months later. Uninhabited treeswere vacant at the time of both surveys.(b) Relative growth increments weresigniﬁcantly greater ( P<0.05) for trees
undergoing transitions in ant occupancy in the direction of the ants’ competitivehierarchy ( n=85) than for those against
the hierarchy ( n=48). Growth increment
was determined relative to trees occupied
by the same ant species when these antswere not displaced. Error bars showstandard errors. (After Palmer et al. , 2000).EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 384•• ••SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 385
13.3.2 Farming of insects by ants
Ants farm many species of aphids
(homopterans) in return for sugar-richsecretions of honeydew. The ‘ﬂocks’of aphids beneﬁt through suffering lower mortality rates causedby predators, showing increased feeding and excretion rates, and
forming larger colonies. But it would be wrong, as ever, to ima-gine that this is a cosy relationship with nothing but beneﬁts onboth sides: the aphids are being manipulated – is there a price thatthey pay to be entered on the other side of the balance sheet (Stadler& Dixon, 1998)? This question has been addressed for coloniesof the aphid Tuberculatus quercicola attended by the red wood ant
Formica yessensis on the island of Hokkaido, northern Japan (Yao
et al., 2000). As expected, in the presence of predators, aphid colonies
survived signiﬁcantly longer when attended by ants than when
ants were excluded by smearing ant repellent at the base of theoak trees on which the aphids lived (Figure 13.5a). However, therewere also costs for the aphids: in an environment from which pred-
ators were excluded, and the effects of ant attendance on aphidscould thus be viewed in isolation, ant-attended aphids grew lesswell and were less fecund than those where ants as well as pred-ators were excluded (Figure 13.5b).
Another classic farming mutualism
is that between ants and many speciesof lycaenid butterﬂy. In a number ofcases, young lycaenid caterpillars feedon their preferred food plants usually until their third or fourthinstar, when they expose themselves to foraging ant workers that
pick them up and carry them back to their nests – the ants‘adopt’ them. There, the ants ‘milk’ a sugary secretion from a specialized gland of the caterpillars, and in return protect themfrom predators and parasitoids throughout the remainder of theirlarval and pupal lives. On the other hand, in other lycaenid–antinteractions the evolutionary balance is rather different. Thecaterpillars produce chemical signals mimicking chemicals producedby the ants, inducing the ants to carry them back to their nests andallowing them to remain there. Within the nests, the caterpillarsmay either act as social parasites (‘cuckoos’, see Section 12.2.3),being fed by the ants (e.g. the large-blue butterﬂy Maculinea rebeli ,
which feeds on the crossleaved gentian, Gentiana cruciata , and whose
caterpillars mimic the larvae of the ant Myrmica schenkii ), or they
may simply prey upon the ants (e.g. another large-blue, M. arion ,
which feeds on wild thyme, Thymus serpyllum ) (Elmes et al. , 2002).
13.3.3 Farming of fungi by beetles and ants
Much plant tissue, including wood, is unavailable as a direct
source of food to most animals because they lack the enzymesthat can digest cellulose and lignins (see Sections 3.7.2 and11.3.1). However, many fungi possess these enzymes, and an amongst four species of ant that have mutualistic relationships
with Acacia drepanolobium trees in Laikipia, Kenya, nesting within
the swollen thorns and feeding from the nectaries at the leaf bases. Experimentally staged conﬂicts and natural take-overs ofplants both indicated a dominance hierarchy among the antspecies. Crematogaster sjostedti was the most dominant, followed
by C. mimosae , C. nigriceps and Tetraponera penzigi . Irrespective of
which ant species had colonized a particular acacia tree, occupiedtrees tended to grow faster than unoccupied trees (Figure 13.4a).This conﬁrmed the mutualistic nature of the interactions over-all. But more subtly, changes in ant occupancy in the directionof the dominance hierarchy (take-over by a more dominantspecies) occurred on plants that grew faster than average, whereaschanges in the opposite direction to the hierarchy occurred onplants that grew more slowly than average (Figure 13.4b).
These data therefore suggest that take-overs are rather different
on fast and slow growing trees, though the details remain spe-culative. It may be, for example, that trees that grow fastest alsoproduce ant ‘rewards’ at the greatest rate and are actively chosenby the dominant ant species; whereas slow growing trees are morereadily abandoned by dominant species, with their much greaterdemands for resources. Alternatively, competitively superior antspecies may be able to detect and preferentially colonize faster
growing trees. What is clear is that these mutualistic interactionsare not cosy relationships between pairs of species that we canseparate from a more tangled web of interactions. The costs andbeneﬁts accruing to the different partners vary in space and time,driving complex dynamics amongst the competing ant species thatin turn determine the ultimate balance sheet for the acacias.
Ant–plant interactions are reviewed by Heil and McKey (2003).
13.3 Culture of crops or livestock
13.3.1 Human agriculture
At least in terms of geographic extent, some of the most dramatic
mutualisms are those of human agriculture. The numbers of indi-vidual plants of wheat, barley, oats, corn and rice, and the areasthese crops occupy, vastly exceed what would have been presentif they had not been brought into cultivation. The increase in
human population since the time of hunter–gatherers is some measure of the reciprocal advantage to Homo sapiens . Even with-
out doing the experiment, we can easily imagine the effect theextinction of humans would have on the world population of riceplants or the effect of the extinction of rice plants on the popu-lation of humans. Similar comments apply to the domesticationof cattle, sheep and other mammals.
Similar ‘farming’ mutualisms have developed in termite and
especially ant societies, where the farmers may protect indi-
viduals they exploit from competitors and predators and may even move or tend them.ants and blue
butterﬂiesfarmed aphids: dothey pay a price?EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 385386 CHAPTER 13
animal that can eat such fungi gains indirect access to an energy-
rich food. Some very specialized mutualisms have developedbetween animal and fungal decomposers. Beetles in the groupScolytidae tunnel deep into the wood of dead and dying trees, and
fungi that are speciﬁc for particular species of beetle grow in 
these burrows and are continually grazed by the beetle larvae.These ‘ambrosia’ beetles may carry inocula of the fungus in theirdigestive tract, and some species bear specialized brushes of hairs on their heads that carry the spores. The fungi serve as food for the beetle and in turn depend on it for dispersal to newtunnels.
Fungus-farming ants are found only in the New World, and
the 210 described species appear to have evolved from a commonancestor: that is, the trait has appeared just once in evolution. 
The more ‘primitive’ species typically use dead vegetative debrisas well as insect feces and corpses to manure their gardens; the genera Trachymyrmex and Sericomyrmex typically use dead 
vegetable matter; whereas species of the two most derived (evolutionarily ‘advanced’) genera, Acromyrmex and Atta, are
‘leaf-cutters’ using mostly fresh leaves and ﬂowers (Currie,2001). Leaf-cutting ants are the most remarkable of the fungus-farming ants. They excavate 2–3-liter cavities in the soil, and inthese a basidiomycete fungus is cultured on leaves that are cutfrom neighboring vegetation (Figure 13.6). The ant colony may depend absolutely on the fungus for the nutrition of their larvae. Workers lick the fungus colonies and remove specializedswollen hyphae, which are aggregated into bite-sized ‘staphylae’.
These are fed to the larvae and this ‘pruning’ of the fungus may stimulate further fungal growth. The fungus gains from the association: it is both fed and dispersed by leaf-cutting antsand has never been found outside their nests. The reproductivefemale ant carries her last meal as a culture when she leaves onecolony to found another.Most phytophagous insects have
very narrow diets – indeed, the vast
majority of insect herbivores are strictmonophages (see Section 9.5). Theleaf-cutting ants are remarkable amongst insect herbivores in
their polyphagy. Ants from a nest of Atta cephalotes harvest from
50 to 77% of the plant species in their neighborhood; and leaf-cutting ants generally may harvest 17% of total leaf productionin tropical rainforest and be the ecologically dominant herbivoresin the community. It is their polyphagy that gives them this remark-able status. In contrast to the A. cephalotes adults though, the 
larvae appear to be extreme dietary specialists, being restrictedto nutritive bodies (gongylidia) produced by the fungus Attamyces 
bromatiﬁcus , which the adults cultivate and which decompose the
leaf fragments (Cherrett et al. , 1989).
Moreover, just as human farmers
may be plagued by weeds, so fungus-
farming ants have to contend withother species of fungi that may devastate their crop. Fungal pathogens of the genus Escovopsis
are specialized (never found other than in fungus gardens) and virulent: in one experiment, nine of 16 colonies of the leaf-cutterAtta colombica that were treated with heavy doses of Escovopsis
spores lost their garden within 3 weeks of treatment (Currie, 2001).But the ants have another mutualistic association to help them:a ﬁlamentous actinomycete bacterium associated with the sur-face of the ants is dispersed to new gardens by virgin queens on
their nuptial ﬂight, and the ants may even produce chemicals that promote the actinomycete’s growth. For its part, the acti-nomycete produces an antibiotic with specialized and potentinhibitory effects against Escovopsis . It even appears to protect the
ants themselves from pathogens and to promote the growth ofthe farmed fungi (Currie, 2001). Escovopsis therefore has ranged
•• ••leaf-cutting ants:
remarkablypolyphagousSurvival rate
0.01.0(a)
10
Days after the start of experiments0.8
0.6
0.20.4
02468 1 4 1 8 3 0 22 26Ant attended
Ant excluded
Average hind femur
length (mm)
0.420.5(b)
Season0.48
0.440.46
2 12 1
Average number of embryos1015
Season13
1112
2 12 114
Figure 13.5 (a) Ant-excluded colonies of the aphid Tuberculatus quercicola were more likely to become extinct than those attended by 
ants ( X2=15.9, P<0.0001). (b) But in the absence of predators, ant-excluded colonies perform better than those attended by ants. Shown
are the averages for aphid body size (hind femur length; F=6.75, P=0.013) and numbers of embryos ( F=7.25, P=0.010), ± SE, for 
two seasons ( July 23 to August 11, 1998 and August 12 to August 31, 1998) in a predator-free environment. /H17033, ant-excluded treatment; 
/H17033, ant-attended treatment. (After Yao et al. , 2000.)
ants, farmed fungi
and actinomycetes: athree-way mutualismEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 386SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 387
against it not just two two-species mutualisms but a three-species
mutualism amongst ants, farmed fungi and actinomycetes.
13.4 Dispersal of seeds and pollen
13.4.1 Seed dispersal mutualisms
Very many plant species use animals to disperse their seeds andpollen. About 10% of all ﬂowering plants possess seeds or fruitsthat bear hooks, barbs or glues that become attached to thehairs, bristles or feathers of any animal that comes into contactwith them. They are frequently an irritation to the animal,which often cleans itself and removes them if it can, but usually
after carrying them some distance. In these cases the beneﬁt is to the plant (which has invested resources in attachmentmechanisms) and there is no reward to the animal.
Quite different are the true mutu-
alisms between higher plants and thebirds and other animals that feed on theﬂeshy fruits and disperse the seeds. Of course, for the relation-ship to be mutualistic it is essential that the animal digests onlythe ﬂeshy fruit and not the seeds, which must remain viable when regurgitated or defecated. Thick, strong defenses that pro-tect plant embryos are usually part of the price paid by the plantfor dispersal by fruit-eaters. The plant kingdom has exploited asplendid array of morphological variations in the evolution of ﬂeshyfruits (Figure 13.7).
Mutualisms involving animals that eat ﬂeshy fruits and disperse
seeds are seldom very speciﬁc to the species of animal concerned.Partly, this is because these mutualisms usually involve long-livedbirds or mammals, and even in the tropics there are few plantspecies that fruit throughout the year and form a reliable foodsupply for any one specialist. But also, as will be apparent whenpollination mutualisms are considered next, a more exclusive mutu-
alistic link would require the plant’s reward to be protected anddenied to other animal species: this is much easier for nectar thanfor fruit. In any case, specialization by the animal is important inpollination, because interspecies transfers of pollen are disadvant-ageous, whereas with fruit and seed it is necessary only that theyare dispersed away from the parent plant.
13.4.2 Pollination mutualisms
Most animal-pollinated ﬂowers offer nectar, pollen or both as a
reward to their visitors. Floral nectar seems to have no value tothe plant other than as an attractant to animals and it has a costto the plant, because the nectar carbohydrates might have beenused in growth or some other activity.
Presumably, the evolution of specialized ﬂowers and the
involvement of animal pollinators have been favored because 
an animal may be able to recognize and discriminate between different ﬂowers and so move pollen between different ﬂowersof the same species but not to ﬂowers of other species. Passivetransfer of pollen, for example by wind or water, does not dis-criminate in this way and is therefore much more wasteful.Indeed, where the vectors and ﬂowers are highly specialized, asis the case in many orchids, virtually no pollen is wasted even on
the ﬂowers of other species.
There are, though, costs that arise from adopting animals as
mutualists in ﬂower pollination. For example, animals carryingpollen may be responsible for the transmission of sexual diseases aswell (Shykoff & Bucheli, 1995). The fungal pathogen Microbotryum
violaceum , for example, is transmitted by pollinating visitors to the
•• ••
Figure 13.6 (a) Partially excavated nest of the leaf-cutting ant
Atta vollenweideri in the Chaco of Paraguay. The above-ground
spoil heap excavated by the ants extended at least 1 m below the
bottom of the excavation. (b) Queen of A. cephalotes (with an
attendant worker on her abdomen) on a young fungus garden in
the laboratory, showing the cell-like structure of the garden withits small leaf fragments and binding fungal hyphae. (Courtesy of J. M. Cherrett.)(a)
(b)fruitsEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 387•• ••388 CHAPTER 13
Leathery outer ovary wall
(exocarp)
Fleshy inner ovary wall
(endocarp)
Orange  (Rutaceae)
Idealized superior
ovary
Cherry
(Rosaceae)Peach(Rosaceae)Apple(Rosaceae)Strawberry(Rosaceae)Tomato
(Solanaceae)
Mulberry
(Moraceae)Blackberry(Rosaceae)
SepalSepalOvarySepalStyle
Fleshy sepalsStony innerovary wallFleshy outerovary wallEndocarp
EpicarpMesocarp
Unfertilizedcarpel
Style
Testa
EndocarpYew (Gymnosperm: Taxaceae)
No ovary presentSuperior
ovary
Achene
(dry ovary with1 seed inside)
Sepal
Fleshysupportingreceptacle
Fleshyenclosingrecepta
cleFleshyovarywall
Fleshyoutgrowthfromseedcoat
Figure 13.7 A variety of ﬂeshy fruits involved in seed dispersal mutualisms illustrating morphological specializations that have been
involved in the evolution of attractive ﬂeshy structures.EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 388•• ••SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 389
ﬂowers of white campion ( Silene alba ) and in infected plants the
anthers are ﬁlled with fungal spores.
Many different kinds of animals have
entered into pollination liaisons with
ﬂowering plants, including humming-
birds, bats and even small rodents andmarsupials (Figure 13.8). However,
the pollinators par excellence are, without doubt, the insects.
Pollen is a nutritionally rich food resource, and in the simplestinsect-pollinated ﬂowers, pollen is offered in abundance andfreely exposed to all and sundry. The plants rely for pollinationon the insects being less than wholly efﬁcient in their pollen consumption, carrying their spilt food with them from plant toplant. In more complex ﬂowers, nectar (a solution of sugars) is
produced as an additional or alternative reward. In the simplestof these, the nectaries are unprotected, but with increasing spe-cialization the nectaries are enclosed in structures that restrict access to the nectar to just a few species of visitor. This rangecan be seen within the family Ranunculaceae. In the simpleﬂower of Ranunculus ﬁcaria the nectaries are exposed to all 
visitors, but in the more specialized ﬂower of R. bulbosus there 
is a ﬂap over the nectary, and in Aquilegia the nectaries have 
developed into long tubes and only visitors with long probosces(tongues) can reach the nectar. In the related Aconitum the whole
ﬂower is structured so that the nectaries are accessible only toinsects of the right shape and size that are forced to brush againstthe anthers and pick up pollen. Unprotected nectaries have the
advantage of a ready supply of pollinators, but because these pollinators are unspecialized they transfer much of the pollen tothe ﬂowers of other species (though in practice, many general-
ists are actually ‘sequential specialists’, foraging preferentially onone plant species for hours or days). Protected nectaries have theadvantage of efﬁcient transfer of pollen by specialists to otherﬂowers of the same species, but are reliant on there being
sufﬁcient numbers of these specialists.
Charles Darwin (1859) recognized that a long nectary, as 
in Aquilegia , forced a pollinating insect into close contact with 
the pollen at the nectary’s mouth. Natural selection may then favor even longer nectaries, and as an evolutionary reaction, the tongues of the pollinator would be selected for increasing length – a reciprocal and escalating process of specialization.Nilsson (1988) deliberately shortened the nectary tubes of the long-tubed orchid Platanthera and showed that the ﬂowers then
produced many fewer seeds – presumably because the pollinator 
was not forced into a position that maximized the efﬁciency ofpollination.
Flowering is a seasonal event in
most plants, and this places strict limits on the degree to which a pol-linator can become an obligate specialist. A pollinator can onlybecome completely dependent on speciﬁc ﬂowers as a source offood if its life cycle matches the ﬂowering season of the plant.This is feasible for many short-lived insects like butterﬂies andmoths, but longer lived pollinators such as bats and rodents, or bees with their long-lived colonies, are more likely to be generalists, turning from one relatively unspecialized ﬂower to
another through the seasons or to quite different foods when nectar is unavailable.
insect pollinators:
from generalists toultraspecialists
seasonality
Figure 13.8 Pollinators: (a) honeybee ( Apis mellifera ) on raspberry ﬂowers, and (b) Cape sugarbird ( Promerops cafer ) feeding on Protea
eximia. (Courtesy of Heather Angel.)(a) (b)EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 389390 CHAPTER 13
13.4.3 Brood site pollination: ﬁgs and yuccas
Not every insect-pollinated plant pro-
vides its pollinator with only a take-away
meal. In a number of cases, the plants also provide a home andsufﬁcient food for the development of the insect larvae (Proctoret al. , 1996). The best studied of these are the complex, largely
species-speciﬁc interactions between ﬁgs ( Ficus ) and ﬁg wasps
(Figure 13.9) (Wiebes, 1979; Bronstein, 1988). Figs bear many tiny
ﬂowers on a swollen receptacle with a narrow opening to the outside; the receptacle then becomes the ﬂeshy fruit. The best-known species is the edible ﬁg, Ficus carica . Some cultivated
forms are entirely female and require no pollination for fruit to develop, but in wild F. carica three types of receptacle are 
produced at different times of the year. (Other species are less 
complicated, but the life cycle is similar.) In winter, the ﬂowers are
mostly neuter (sterile female) with a few male ﬂowers near the
opening. Tiny females of the wasp Blastophaga psenes invade the
receptacle, lay eggs in the neuter ﬂowers and then die. Each wasplarva then completes its development in the ovary of one ﬂower,but the males hatch ﬁrst and chew open the seeds occupied bythe females and then mate with them. In early summer thefemales emerge, receiving pollen at the entrance from the maleﬂowers, which have only just opened.
The fertilized females carry the pollen to a second type of 
receptacle, containing neuter and female ﬂowers, where they laytheir eggs. Neuter ﬂowers, which cannot set seed, have a shortstyle: the wasps can reach to lay their eggs in the ovaries wherethey develop. Female ﬂowers, though, have long styles so the wasps
cannot reach the ovaries and their eggs fail to develop, but in lay-ing these eggs they fertilize the ﬂowers, which set seed. Hence,these receptacles generate a combination of viable seeds (that beneﬁt the ﬁg) and adult ﬁg wasps (that obviously beneﬁt the wasps, but also beneﬁt the ﬁgs since they are the ﬁgs’ pollinators).Following another round of wasp development, fertilized females
emerge in the fall, and a variety of other animals eat the fruit anddisperse the seeds. The fall-emerging wasps lay their eggs in a thirdkind of receptacle containing only neuter ﬂowers, from which wasps emerge in winter to start the cycle again.
This, then, apart from being a fasci-
nating piece of natural history, is agood example of a mutualism in which
the interests of the two participantsnone the less appear not to coincide. Speciﬁcally, the optimal pro-portion of ﬂowers that develop into ﬁg seeds and ﬁg wasps is different for the two parties, and we might reasonably expect to
see a negative correla tion between the two: seeds produced at the
expense of wasps, and vice versa (Herre & West, 1997). In fact,
detecting this negative correlation, and hence establishing theconﬂict of interest, has proved elusive for reasons that frequentlyapply in studies of evolutionary ecology. The two variables tend,
rather, to be positively correlated, since both tend to increase 
with two ‘confounding’ variables: the overall size of fruit and theoverall proportion of ﬂowers in a fruit that are visited by wasps.Herre and West (1997), however, in analyzing data from ninespecies of New World ﬁgs, were able to over-come this in a waythat is generally applicable in such situations. They controlled statistically for variation in the confounding variables (asking, ineffect, what the relationship between seed and wasp numbers 
would be in a fruit of constant size in which a constant pro-portion of ﬂowers was visited) and then were able to uncover a negative correlation. The ﬁg and ﬁg wasp mutualists doappear
to be involved in an on-going evolutionary battle.
A similar, and similarly much 
studied, set of mutualisms occursbetween the 35–50 species of Yucca
plant that live in North and CentralAmerica and the 17 species of yucca moth, 13 of which are
newly described since 1999 (Pellmyr & Leebens-Mack, 2000). Afemale moth uses specialized ‘tentacles’ to collect togetherpollen from several anthers in one ﬂower, which she then takesto the ﬂower of another inﬂorescence (promoting outbreeding)where she both lays eggs in the ovaries and carefully deposits thepollen, again using her tentacles. The development of the mothlarvae requires successful pollination, since unpollinated ﬂowersquickly die, but the larvae also consume seeds in their immedi-ate vicinity, though many other seeds develop successfully. Oncompleting their development, the larvae drop to the soil to pupate,emerging one or more years later during the yucca’s ﬂoweringseason. The reproductive success of an individual adult female mothis not, therefore, linked to that of an individual yucca plant in the
same way as are those of female ﬁg wasps and ﬁgs.
A detailed review of both seed dispersal and pollination mutu-
alisms is given by Thompson (1995), who provides a thoroughaccount of the processes that may lead to the evolution of suchmutualisms.
•• ••
Figure 13.9 Fig wasps on a developing ﬁg. Reproduced by
permission of Gregory Dimijian/Science Photo Library.
ﬁgs and ﬁg wasps . . .. . . show mutualism
despite conﬂict
yuccas and yuccamothsEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 390SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 391
13.5 Mutualisms involving gut inhabitants
Most of the mutualisms discussed so far have depended on 
patterns of behavior, where neither species lives entirely ‘within’its partner. In many other mutualisms, one of the partners is a unicellular eukaryote or bacterium that is integrated more or less permanently into the body cavity or even the cells of its
multicellular partner. The microbiota occupying parts of variousanimals’ alimentary canals are the best known extracellular symbionts.
13.5.1 Vertebrate guts
The crucial role of microbes in the digestion of cellulose by 
vertebrate herbivores has long been appreciated, but it nowappears that the gastrointestinal tracts of all vertebrates are populated by a mutualistic microbiota (reviewed in Stevens &Hume, 1998). Protozoa and fungi are usually present but the majorcontributors to these ‘fermentation’ processes are bacteria. Their
diversity is greatest in regions of the gut where the pH is relat-
ively neutral and food retention times are relatively long. Insmall mammals (e.g. rodents, rabbits and hares) the cecum is the main fermentation chamber, whereas in larger nonruminantmammals such as horses the colon is the main site, as it is in elephants, which, like rabbits, practice coprophagy (consume theirown feces) (Figure 13.10). In ruminants, like cattle and sheep, andin kangaroos and other marsupials, fermentation occurs in spe-cialized stomachs.
The basis of the mutualism is straightforward. The microbes
receive a steady ﬂow of substrates for growth in the form of food
that has been eaten, chewed and partly homogenized. They livewithin a chamber in which pH and, in endotherms, temperatureare regulated and anaerobic conditions are maintained. The ver-tebrate hosts, especially the herbivores, receive nutrition from foodthat they would otherwise ﬁnd, literally, indigestible. The bacteriaproduce short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) by fermentation of thehost’s dietary cellulose and starches and of the endogenous 
•• ••0c m 50 0c m 10
0c m 10 0c m 20(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 13.10 The digestive tracts of
herbivorous mammals are commonly
modiﬁed to provide fermentation chambers inhabited by a rich fauna andﬂora or microbes. (a) A rabbit, with a
fermentation chamber in the expandedcecum. (b) A zebra, with fermentationchambers in both the cecum and colon. (c) A sheep, with foregut fermentation inan enlarged portion of the stomach, rumenand reticulum. (d) A kangaroo, with anelongate fermentation chamber in theproximal portion of the stomach. (AfterStevens & Hume, 1998.)EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 391392 CHAPTER 13
carbohydrates contained in host mucus and sloughed epithelial
cells. SCFAs are often a major source of energy for the host; for example, they provide more than 60% of the maintenanceenergy requirements for cattle and 29–79% of those for sheep(Stevens & Hume, 1998). The microbes also convert nitrogenous
compounds (amino acids that escape absorption in the midgut,urea that would otherwise be excreted by the host, mucus andsloughed cells) into ammonia and microbial protein, conservingnitrogen and water; and they synthesize B vitamins. The micro-bial protein is useful to the host if it can be digested – in the intest-ine by foregut fermenters and following coprophagy in hindgutfermenters – but ammonia is usually not useful and may even betoxic to the host.
13.5.2 Ruminant guts
The stomach of ruminants comprises a three-part forestomach
(rumen, reticulum and omasum) followed by an enzyme-secreting abomasum that is similar to the whole stomach ofmost other vertebrates. The rumen and reticulum are the mainsites of fermentation, and the omasum serves largely to transfer
material to the abomasum. Only particles with a volume ofabout 5 µl or less can pass from the reticulum into the omasum;
the animal regurgitates and rechews the larger particles (the pro-cess of rumination). Dense populations of bacteria (10
10–1011ml−1)
and protozoa (105–106ml−1but occupying a similar volume to 
the bacteria) are present in the rumen. The bacterial commun-
ities of the rumen are composed almost wholly of obligateanaerobes – many are killed instantly by exposure to oxygen –but they perform a wide variety of functions (subsist on a wide
variety of substrates) and generate a wide range of products(Table 13.1). Cellulose and other ﬁbers are the important con-stituents of the ruminant’s diet, and the ruminant itself lacks theenzymes to digest these. The cellulolytic activities of the rumenmicroﬂora are therefore of crucial importance. But not all the bacteria are cellulolytic: many subsist on substrates (lactate,hydrogen) generated by other bacteria in the rumen.
The protozoa in the gut are also a
complex mixture of specialists. Most
are holotrich ciliates and entodinio-morphs. A few can digest cellulose.The cellulolytic ciliates have intrinsic cel-lulases, although some other protozoa may use bacterial symbionts.Some consume bacteria: in their absence the number of bacteriarise. Some of the entodiniomorphs prey on other protozoa.Thus, the diverse processes of competition, predation and mutu-
alism, and the food chains that characterize terrestrial and
aquatic communities in nature, are all present within the rumenmicrocosm.
•• ••Species Function Products
Bacteroides succinogenes C, A F, A, S
Ruminococcus albus C, X F, A, E, H, C
R. ﬂavefaciens C, X F, A, S, H
Butyrivibrio ﬁbrisolvens C, X, PR F, A, L, B, E, H, C
Clostridium lochheadii C, PR F, A, B, E, H, C
Streptococcus bovis A, SS, PR L, A, F
B. amylophilus A, P, PR F, A, S
B. ruminicola A, X, P, PR F, A, P, S
Succinimonas amylolytica A, D A, S
Selenomonas ruminantium A, SS, GU, LU, PR A, L, P, H, C
Lachnospira multiparus P, PR, A F, A, E, L, H, C
Succinivibrio dextrinosolvens P, D F, A, L, S
Methanobrevibacter ruminantium M, HU M
Methanosarcina barkeri M, HU M, C
Spirochete species P, SS F, A, L, S, E
Megasphaera elsdenii SS, LU A, P, B, V, CP, H, C
Lactobacillus sp. SS L
Anaerovibrio lipolytica L, GU A, P, S
Eubacterium ruminantium SS F, A, B, C
Functions: A, amylolytic; C, cellulolytic; D, dextrinolytic; GU, glycerol utilizing; HU, hydrogen
utilizer; L, lipolytic; LU, lactate utilizing; M, methanogenic; P, pectinolytic; PR, proteolytic; SS, major soluble sugar fermenter; X, xylanolytic.Products: A, acetate; B, butyrate; C, carbon dioxide; CP, caproate; E, ethanol; F, formate; H, hydrogen; L, lactate; M, methane P, propionate; S, succinate; V, valerate;.Table 13.1 A number of the bacterial
species of the rumen, illustrating their wide
range of functions and the wide range ofproducts that they generate. (After Allison,1984; Stevens & Hume, 1998.)
a complex
community ofmutualistsEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 392SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 393
13.5.3 Refection
Eating feces is a taboo amongst humans, presumably through some
combination of biological and cultural evolution in response tothe health hazards posed by pathogenic microbes, including manythat are relatively harmless in the hindgut but are pathogenic inmore anterior regions. For many vertebrates, however, symbiotic
microbes, living in the hindgut beyond the regions where effect-ive nutrient absorption is possible, are a resource that is too goodto waste. Thus coprophagy (eating feces) or refection (eating one’s own feces) is a regular practice in many small herbivorousmammals. This is developed to a ﬁne art in species such as rabbits that have a ‘colonic separation mechanism’ that allows themto produce separate dry, non-nutritious fecal pellets and soft, morenutritious pellets that they consume selectively. These contain highlevels of SCFAs, microbial protein and B vitamins, and can provide
30% of a rabbit’s nitrogen requirements and more B vitamins thanit requires (Björnhag, 1994; Stevens & Hume, 1998).
13.5.4 Termite guts
Termites are social insects of the order Isoptera, many of which depend on mutualists for the digestion of wood. Primitivetermites feed directly on wood, and most of the cellulose, hemicelluloses and possibly lignins are digested by mutualists inthe gut (Figure 13.11), where the paunch (part of the segmentedhindgut) forms a microbial fermentation chamber. However, the advanced termites (75% of all the species) rely much more
heavily on their own cellulase (Hogan et al. , 1988), while a third
group (the Macro termitinae) cultivate wood-digesting fungi that
the termites eat along with the wood itself, which the fungal cellulases assist in digesting.
Termites refecate, so that food material passes at least twice
through the gut, and microbes that have reproduced during the
ﬁrst passage may be digested the second time round. The majorgroup of microorganisms in the paunch of primitive termites areanaerobic ﬂagellate protozoans. Bacteria are also present, but cannot digest cellulose. The protozoa engulf particles of wood andferment the cellulose within their cells, releasing carbon dioxideand hydrogen. The principal products, subsequently absorbed bythe host, are SCFAs (as in vertebrates) but in termites they are
primarily acetic acid.
The bacterial population of the termite gut is less conspicuous
than that of the rumen, but appears to play a part in two distinctmutualisms.
•• ••
Figure 13.11 Electron micrograph of a
thin section of the paunch of the termite
Reticulitermes ﬂavipes. Much of the ﬂora 
is composed of aggregates of bacteria.Amongst them can be seen endospore-
forming bacteria (E), spirochetes (S) andprotozoa. (After Breznak, 1975.)EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 393394 CHAPTER 13
1Spirochetes tend to be concentrated at the surface of the
ﬂagellates. The spirochetes possibly receive nutrients from the ﬂagellates, and the ﬂagellates gain mobility from themovements of the spirochetes: a pair of mutualists livingmutualistically within a third species.
2Some bacteria in the termite gut are capable of ﬁxing gaseous
nitrogen – apparently the only clearly established example ofnitrogen-ﬁxing symbionts in insects (Douglas, 1992). Nitrogenﬁxation stops when antibacterial antibiotics are eaten (Breznak,1975), and the rate of nitrogen ﬁxation falls off sharply if thenitrogen content of the diet is increased.
13.6 Mutualism within animal cells: insect
mycetocyte symbioses
In mycetocyte symbioses between microorganisms and insects,
the maternally inherited microorganisms are found within the cytoplasm of specialized cells, mycetocytes, and the interactionis unquestionably mutualistic. It is required by the insects for thenutritional beneﬁts the microorganisms bring, as key providers
of essential amino acids, lipids and vitamins, and is required by the microorganisms for their very existence (Douglas, 1998).The symbioses are found in a wide variety of types of insect, andare universally or near-universally present in cockroaches, hom-opterans, bed bugs, sucking lice, tsetse ﬂies, lyctid beetles and camponotid ants. They have evolved independently in different
groups of microorganisms and their insect partners, but in effectively all cases the insects live their lives on nutritionally pooror unbalanced diets: phloem sap, vertebrate blood, wood and so
on. Mostly the symbionts are various sorts of bacteria, althoughin some insects yeasts are involved.
Amongst these symbioses, most is
known by far about the interactionsbetween aphids and bacteria in thegenus Buchnera (Douglas, 1998). The
mycetocytes are found in the hemocoel of the aphids and the bacteria occupy around 60% of the mycetocyte cytoplasm. The bacteria cannot be brought into culture in the laboratory and 
have never been found other than in aphid mycetocytes, but theextent and nature of the beneﬁt they bring to the aphids can be studied by removing the Buchnera by treating the aphids with 
antibiotics. Such ‘aposymbiotic’ aphids grow very slowly anddevelop into adults that produce few or no offspring. The mostfundamental function performed by the bacteria is to produce essen-tial amino acids that are absent in phloem sap from nonessentialamino acids like glutamate, and antibiotic treatment conﬁrms that
the aphids cannot do this alone. In addition, though, the Buchnera
seem to provide other beneﬁts, since symbiotic aphids still out-perform aposymbiotic aphids when the latter are provided withall the essential amino acids, but establishing further nutritionalfunctions has proved elusive.
•• ••aphids and 
Buchnera ...Aphid phylogeny Bacterial phylogeny
Ra
Pv
Ec86
ScMr100
Pb
Mv
CvDnApUsMpRpRmSg100
10056
9
97AsianAmericanMelaphidina
Origin of
endosymbioticassociation
80–120
Myr ago80–160Myr ago
30–80Myr ago48–70Myr agoFigure 13.12 The phylogeny of selected
aphids and their corresponding primary
endosymbionts. Other bacteria are shownfor comparison. The aphid phylogeny (afterHeie, 1987) is shown on the left and the
bacterial phylogeny on the right. Brokenlines connect the associated aphids andbacteria. Three species of bacteria that arenot endosymbionts are also shown in thephylogeny: Ec, Escherichia coli ; Pv, Proteus
vulgaris ; Ra, Ruminobacter amylophilus
(a rumen symbiont). The distances alongthe branches are drawn to be roughlyproportionate to time. (After Moran et al. ,
1993.) Aphid species: Ap, Acyrthosiphon
pisum ; Cv, Chaitophorus viminalis ;
Dn, Diuraphis noxia ; Mp, Myzus persicae ;
Mr, Melaphis rhois ; Mv, Mindarus victoriae ;
Pb, Pemphigus betae ; Rm, Rhopalosiphum
maidis ; Rp, Rhodalosiphon padi ; Sc,
Schlectendalia chinensis ; Sg, Schizaphis
graminum ; Us, Uroleucon sonchi.EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 394SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 395
The aphid– Buchnera interaction also
provides an excellent example of how
an intimate association between mutu-alists may link them at both the eco-logical and the evolutionary level. The
Buchnera are transmitted transovarially, that is, they are passed
by a mother to her offspring in her eggs. Hence, an aphid lineage
supports a corresponding single Buchnera lineage, and this is 
no doubt the reason for the strictly congruent phylogenies of aphid and Buchnera species: each aphid species has its own
Buchnera species (see, for example, Figure 13.12). Moreover, these
molecular studies, which allow the Buchnera phylogeny to be re-
constructed, also suggest that the aphids acquired Buchnera just 
once in their evolutionary history, apparently between 160 and
280 million years ago, after the divergence from the main aphidlineage of the only two aphid families not to have a mycetocytesymbiosis, the phylloxerids and the adelgids (Moran et al. , 1993).
Providing a ﬁnal twist, the only other aphids without Buchnera
(in the family Hormaphididae) appear to have lost them sec-ondarily in their evolutionary history, but they do instead hostsymbiotic yeasts (Douglas, 1998). It seems more likely that theyeasts competitively displaced the bacteria than that the bacteriawere ﬁrst lost and the yeasts subsequently acquired.
Lastly, Douglas (1998) also points out that whereas all
Homoptera that feed on nutritionally deﬁcient phloem sap havemycetocyte symbioses, including the aphids described above,those that have switched secondarily in their evolutionary history
to feeding on intact plant cells have lost the symbiosis. This, then,is an illustration from a comparative, evolutionary perspective that even in clearly mutualistic symbioses like these, the beneﬁtis a net beneﬁt. Once the insects’ requirements are reduced, as in
a switch of diet, the balance of the costs and beneﬁts of the sym-bionts is also changed. In this case, the costs clearly outweigh thebeneﬁts on a changed diet: those insects that losttheir symbionts
have been favored by natural selection.
13.7 Photosynthetic symbionts within aquatic
invertebrates
Algae are found within the tissues of 
a variety of animals, particularly in the phylum Cnidaria. In freshwater
symbioses the algal symbiont is usually Chlorella . For example, 
in Hydra viridis , cells of Chlorella are present in large numbers 
(1.5×10
5per hydroid) within the digestive cells of the endoderm.
In the light, a Hydra receives photosynthates from the algae 
and 50–100% of its oxygen needs. It can also use organic food.Yet when a Hydra is maintained in darkness and fed daily with
organic food, a reduced symbiotic population of algae is main-
tained for at least 6 months that can return to normal within 2 days of exposure to light (Muscatine & Pool, 1979). Thus,armed with its symbionts, and depending on local conditions 
and resources, Hydra can behave both as an autotroph and a 
heterotroph. There must then be regulatory processes harmoniz-ing the growth of the endosymbiont and its host (Douglas & Smith, 1984), as there must presumably be in all such symbioses.If this were not the case, the symbionts would either overgrowand kill the host or fail to keep pace and become diluted as thehost grew.
There are many records of close
associations between algae and protozoain the marine plankton. For example, in the ciliate Mesodinium rubrum , ‘chloroplasts’ are present that
appear to be symbiotic algae. The mutualistic consortium of protists and algae can ﬁx carbon dioxide and take up mineral nutrients, and often forms dense populations known as ‘redtides’ (e.g. Crawford et al. , 1997). Extraordinarily high produc-
tion rates have been recorded from such populations (in excessof 2 g m
−3h−lof carbon) – apparently the highest levels of 
primary productivity ever recorded for populations of aquatic
microorganisms.
13.7.1 Reef-building corals and coral bleaching
We have already noted that mutualists dominate environmentsaround the world in terms of their biomass. Coral reefs providean important example: reef-building corals (another dramaticexample of autogenic ecosystem engineering – see Section 13.1)are in fact mutualistic associations between heterotrophic Cnidaria
and phototrophic dinoﬂagellate algae from the genus Symbiodinium .
Coral reefs provide an illustration, too, of the potential vulner-ability of even the most dominant of ‘engineered’ habitat features.There have been repeated reports of ‘coral bleaching’ since it wasﬁrst described in 1984: the whitening of corals as a result of theloss of the endosymbionts and/or their photosynthetic pigments(Brown, 1997). Bleaching occurs mainly in response to unusuallyelevated temperatures (as seen at the Phuket study site, Thailand;Figure 13.13a), but also in response to high intensities of solar 
radiation and even disease. Thus, episodes of bleaching seem likelyto become increasingly frequent as global temperatures rise(Figure 13.13a; see Section 2.8.2), which is a particular cause forconcern, since some bleaching episodes have been followed by mass mortality of corals. This was apparent at Phuket, for example, associated with the bleaching episodes of 1991 and1995 (Figure 13.13b). (On the other hand, a more catastrophic losshad occurred in 1987 as a result, not of bleaching, but of dredg-ing activity, and the decline in cover in the early 1990s appearedto result from an interaction between bleaching and a variety of
local human disturbances.)
We clearly cannot be complacent
about the effects of global warming on
coral reefs – and there arelikely always
•• ••. . . provide an
ecological andevolutionary link
marine plankton
Hydra and Chlorella
bleaching and globalwarmingEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 395396 CHAPTER 13
to be human disturbances with which bleaching effects can inter-
act – but it is also apparent that reef corals are able to acclimateto the changed conditions that may induce bleaching and torecover from bleaching episodes. Their adaptability is illustratedby another study at Phuket. During the 1995 episode, it had been
observed that bleaching in the coral Goniastrea aspera occurred pre-
dominantly on east- rather than west-facing surfaces. The latternormally suffer greater exposure to solar radiation, which also hasa tendency to cause bleaching. This therefore suggests that tol-erance to bleaching had been built up in the west-facing corals.Such a difference in tolerance was conﬁrmed experimentally(Figure 13.14): there was little or no bleaching on the ‘adapted’west-facing surfaces at high temperatures.
Meanwhile, another study of coral
bleaching adds to the growing realiza-
tion that seemingly simple two-speciesmutualisms may be more complex andsubtler than might be imagined. The
ecologically dominant Caribbean corals Montastraea annularis and
M. faveolata both host three quite separate ‘species’ or ‘phylotypes’
of Symbiodinium (denoted A, Band Cand distinguishable only by
genetic methods). Phylotypes Aand Bare common in shallower,
high-irradiance habitats, whereas Cpredominates in deeper, lower
irradiance sites – illustrated both by comparisons of coloniesfrom different depths and of samples from different depthswithin a colony (Figure 13.14b). In the fall of 1995, following aprolonged period above the mean maximum summer tempera-
ture, bleaching occurred in M. annularis and M. faveolata in the
reefs off Panama and elsewhere. Bleaching, however, was rare atthe shallowest and the deepest sites, but was most apparent in shallower colonies at shaded sites and in deeper colonies at moreexposed sites. A comparison of adjacent samples before and afterbleaching provides an explanation (Figure 13.14c). The bleachingresulted from the selective loss of Symbiodinium C . It appears to
have occurred at locations supporting Cand one or both of the
other two species, near the irradiance limit of Cunder non-bleaching conditions. At shaded deep-water sites, dominated by
C, the high temperatures in 1995 were not sufﬁcient to push C
into bleaching conditions. The shallowest sites were occupied bythe species Aand B, which were not susceptible to bleaching at
these temperatures. Bleaching occurred, however, where Cwas
initially present but was pushed beyond its limit by the increased
temperature. At these sites, the loss of Cwas typically close to
100%, Bdecreased by around 14%, but Amore than doubled in
three of ﬁve instances.
It seems, therefore, ﬁrst, that the coral– Symbiodinium mutu-
alism involves a range of endosymbionts that allows the coralsto thrive in a wider range of habitats than would otherwise bepossible. Second, looking at the mutualism from the algal side,the endosymbionts must constantly be engaged in a competitive
battle, the balance of which alters over space and time (seeSection 8.5). Finally, bleaching (and subsequent recovery), and possibly also ‘adaptation’ of the type described above, may be seenas manifestations of this competitive battle: not breakdowns andreconstructions in a simple two-species association, but shifts ina complex symbiotic community.
13.8 Mutualisms involving higher plants 
and fungi
A wide variety of symbiotic associations are formed between higher
plants and fungi. A very remarkable group of Ascomycete fungi,the Clavicipitaceae, grow in the tissues of many species of grassand a few species of sedge. The family includes species that areeasily recognized as parasites (e.g. Claviceps , the ergot fungus, and
Epichloe , the choke disease of grasses), others that are clearly mutu-
alistic, and a large number where the costs and beneﬁts are
uncertain. The fungal mycelia characteristically grow as sparselybranched ﬁlaments running through intercellular spaces along theaxis of leaves and stems, but they are not found in roots. Manyof the symbiotic fungi produce powerful toxic alkaloids that 
•• ••another mutualism
extending beyondtwo species
SST (°C)
2731(a)
1961
Year30
29
28
1951
1956
1966
1971
19961976
1981198619911966
Live coral cover (%)
070(b)
50
103060
20401946
1985
Year
1987
1989199119931995198619911995
1979
19831981MidOuter
InnerFigure 13.13 (a) Monthly mean sea
surface temperatures (SSTs) for sea areas
off Phuket, Thailand, from 1945 to 1995.The regression line for all points is shown(P<0.001). The dashed line drawn at
30.11°C represents a tentative bleaching
threshold. The years exceeding this areshown: bleaching was observed in 1991 and 1995 but not monitored prior to that.(b) Mean percentage coral cover ( ±SE) 
on inner ( ), mid ( ) and outer( ) reef ﬂats at Phuket, Thailand, overthe period 1979 –95. (After Brown, 1997.)EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 396SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 397Algal density (×102 cm–2)
0.00.8(a)
0.6
0.40.2
Start 27 °C3 4 °C(b)
1
2
3
4Symbionts (cm2 ×10–2)
060(c)
30
20
10
34 6<1:2 A–B–C
1:2–2:1 A>B–C
>2:1A
B
CA + BA  + CB  + CTwo taxons One taxon Three taxons1–3.5m 4–5.5m 6–7mM. annularis
20–30cm
4050
58 79 1 0
B + C communities3
ABC34 6 57
A + C communitiesBefore During
C B Ac.
Figure 13.14 Coral acclimation and recovery in coral bleaching. (a) Algal density in western (light bars) and eastern (dark bars) cores of
the coral Goniastrea aspera before and after exposure to elevated (34°C) and ambient (27°C) temperatures for 68 h. Mean values are shown;
error bars show 1 SD ( n=5). (After Brown et al. , 2000.) (b) Symbiont communities in another coral, Montastraea annularis , collected in
January 1995 off the coast of Panama. Each symbol represents a sample that contained the algal taxa Symbiodinium A , Bor C, or mixtures
of taxa summarized according to the code shown below. Columns in the data represent individual coral colonies (depth increases from left
to right) and rows represent locations of higher (rows 1 and 2) and lower (rows 3 and 4) irradiance, as deﬁned in the diagram t o the left.
(After Rowan et al. , 1997.) (c) Corresponding symbiont communities from close to the bleaching region of Symbiodinium C before ( January
1995) and during (October 1995) an episode of coral bleaching. Densities of A (gray), B (white) and C (orange) before and during bleaching
(left and right bars of each pair, respectively) in samples reported in B+Ccommunities (3–10), A+Ccommunities (3–7) and an ABC
community. (After Rowan et al. , 1997.)
confer some protection from grazing animals (the evidence is
reviewed in Clay, 1990) and, perhaps even more important,deter seed predators (Knoch et al. , 1993).
A quite different mutualism of
fungi with higher plants occurs in
roots. Most higher plants do not haveroots, they have mycorrhizas – inti-
mate mutualisms between fungi and root tissue. Plants of only afew families like the Cruciferae are the exception. Broadly, thefungal networks in mycorrhizas capture nutrients from the soil,which they transport to the plants in exchange for carbon. Manyplant species can live without their mycorrhizal fungi in soils where neither nutrients nor water are ever limiting, but in theharsh world of natural plant communities, the symbioses, if not
strictly obligate, are none the less ‘ecologically obligate’. That is,they are necessary if the individuals are to survive in nature 
(Buscot et al. , 2000). The fossil record suggests that the earliest
land plants, too, were heavily infected. These species lacked roothairs, even roots in some cases, and the early colonization of theland may have depended on the presence of the fungi to make
the necessary intimate contact between plants and substrates.
Generally, three major types of mycorrhiza are recognized.
Arbuscular mycorrhizas are found in up to two-thirds of all plant species, including most nonwoody species and tropicaltrees. Ectomycorrhizal fungi form symbioses with many trees andshrubs, dominating boreal and temperate forests and also sometropical rainforests. Finally, ericoid mycorrhizas are found in thedominant species of heathlands including the northern hemi-sphere heaths and heathers (Ericaceae) and the Australian heaths
(Epacridaceae).
•• ••not roots but
mycorrhizasEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 397••398 CHAPTER 13
13.8.1 Ectomycorrhizas
An estimated 5000–6000 species of Basidiomycete and Ascomycete
fungi form ectomycorrhizas (ECMs) on the roots of trees (Buscotet al. , 2000). Infected roots are usually concentrated in the litter
layer of the soil. Fungi form a sheath or mantle of varying thick-ness around the roots. From there, hyphae radiate into the litter
layer, extracting nutrients and water and also producing large fruiting bodies that release enormous numbers of wind-bornespores. The fungal mycelium also extends inwards from thesheath, penetrating between the cells of the root cortex to giveintimate cell-to-cell contact with the host and establishing an interface with a large surface area for the exchange of photo-assimilates, soil water and nutrients between the host plant andits fungal partner. The fungus usually induces morphogeneticchanges in the host roots, which cease to grow apically and
remain stubby (Figure 13.15). Host roots that penetrate into the deeper, less organically rich layers of the soil continue to elongate.
The ECM fungi (see Buscot et al. , 2000 for a review) are effect-
ive in extracting the sparse and patchy supplies of phosphorus and especially nitrogen from the forest litter layer, and their highspecies diversity presumably reﬂects a corresponding diversity of niches in this environment (though this diversity of niches isvery far from having been demonstrated). Carbon ﬂows from the plant to the fungus, very largely in the form of the simple hexose sugars: glucose and fructose. Fungal consumption of these may represent up to 30% of the plants’ net rate of photosynthate production. The plants, though, are often nitrogen-limited, since
in the forest litter there are low rates of nitrogen mineralization(conversion from organic to inorganic forms), and inorganicnitrogen is itself mostly available as ammonia. It is therefore cru-
cial for forest trees that ECM fungi can access organic nitrogendirectly through enzymic degradation, utilize ammonium as a pre-ferred source of inorganic nitrogen, and circumvent ammoniumdepletion zones through extensive hyphal growth. None the less,the idea that this relationship between the fungi and their hostplants is mutually exploitative rather than ‘cosy’ is emphasized
by its responsiveness to changing circumstances. ECM growth 
is directly related to the rate of ﬂow of hexose sugars from theplant. But when the direct availability of nitrate to the plants ishigh, either naturally or through artiﬁcial supplementation, plantmetabolism is directed away from hexose production (andexport) and towards amino acid synthesis. As a result the ECMdegrades; the plants seem to support just as much ECM as theyappear to need.
13.8.2 Arbuscular mycorrhizas
Arbuscular mycorrhizas (AMs) do not form a sheath but pen-
etrate within the roots of the host, though they do not alter the
host’s root morphology. Roots become infected from myceliumpresent in the soil or from germ tubes that develop from asexualspores, which are very large and produced in small numbers – a
striking contrast with the ECM fungi. Initially, the fungus growsbetween host cells but then enters them and forms a ﬁnelybranched intracellular ‘arbuscule’. The fungi responsible comprisea distinct phylum, the Glomeromycota (Schüßler et al. , 2001).
Although originally divided into only about 150 species, sug-gesting a lack of host speciﬁcity (since there are vastly more speciesof hosts), modern genetic methods have uncovered a far greater
••
Figure 13.15 Mycorrhiza of pine ( Pinus
sylvestris ). The swollen, much branched
structure is the modiﬁed rootlet enveloped
in a thick sheath of fungal tissue. (Courtesyof J. Whiting; photograph by S. Barber.)EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 398••SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 399
diversity among the AM fungi, and there is increasing evidence
of niche differentiation amongst them. For instance, when 89 rootsamples were taken from three grass species that co-occurred inthe same plots in a ﬁeld experiment, and their AM fungi werecharacterized using such a method – terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphism – there was clear separation amongst theAM strains found on the different hosts (Figure 13.16).
There has been a tendency to
emphasize facilitation of the uptake of phosphorus as the main beneﬁt to
plants from AM symbioses (phosphorus is a highly immobile element in the soil, which is therefore frequently limiting toplant growth), but the truth appears to be more complex thanthis. Beneﬁts have been demonstrated, too, in nitrogen uptake,
pathogen and herbivore protection, and resistance to toxic metals(Newsham et al. , 1995). Certainly, there are cases where the inﬂow
of phosphorus is strongly related to the degree of colonization of roots by AM fungi. This has been shown for the bluebell,Hyacinthoides non-scripta , as colonization progresses during its
phase of subterranean growth from August to February throughto its above-ground photosynthetic phase thereafter (Figure 13.17a).Indeed, bluebells cultured without AM fungi are unable to takeup phosphorus through their poorly branched system of roots(Merryweather & Fitter, 1995).
On the other hand, a factorial set of experiments examined
the growth of the annual grass Vulpia ciliata ssp. ambigua at sites
••P. pratensisA. capillaris
F. rubra
Figure 13.16 The similarity among 89 arbuscular mycorrhiza
(AM) fungal communities taken from the roots of three coexisting
grass species, Agrostis capillaris , Poa pratensis and Festuca rubra ,
assessed by terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism.Each terminal on the ‘tree’ is a different sample, with the grass
species from which it originated shown. More similar samples are closer together on the tree. The similarity within, and thedifferentiation between, the AM fungal communities associatedwith different hosts are plainly apparent. (After Vandenkoornhuyseet al. , 2003.)P inflow (pmol m–1 s–1) (          )
Sep 1–112(a)
060
50
40
30
20
10
Percentage root length colonized by AM fungi (          )0
–2
Dec 1 Mar 1 Jun 1(b)
*Mean root length (cm)
–Fus
–Glm0200300
100
–Fus
+Glm+Fus
–Glm+Fus
+Glm
Figure 13.17 (a) Curves ﬁtted to rates of phosphorus inﬂow ( , left axis) and root colonization by arbuscular mycorrhiza (AM) fungi
( , right axis) in the bluebell, Hyacinthoides non-scripta , over a single growing season. (After Merryweather & Fitter, 1995; Newsham 
et al. , 1995.) (b) The effects of a factorial combination of Fusarium oxysporum (Fus) and an AM fungus, Glomus sp. (Glm), on the growth
(root length) of Vulpia plants. Values are means of 16 replicates per treatment; bars show standard errors; the asterisk signiﬁes a signiﬁcant
difference at P<0.05 in a Fisher’s pairwise comparison. (After Newsham et al. , 1994, 1995.)a range of beneﬁts?EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 399••400 CHAPTER 13
in eastern England where there were large differences in the intens-
ity of natural mycorrhizal infection (West et al. , 1993). In one 
treatment phosphate was applied, and in another the fungicidebenomyl was used to control the fungal infection. Fecundity of the grass was scarcely affected by any of the treatments. 
An explanation was provided by a further set of experiments (Figure 13.17b) in which seedlings of Vulpia were grown with an
AM fungus ( Glomus sp.), with the pathogenic fungus Fusarium oxys-
porum , with both, and with neither. Growth was not enhanced
by Glomus alone, but growth was harmed by Fusarium in the
absence of Glomus . When both were present, growth returned 
to normal levels. Clearly, the mycorrhiza did not beneﬁt the phosphorus-economy of the Vulpia , but it did protect it from 
the harmful effects of the pathogen. (In the previous experiment,
benomyl presumably had no effect on performance because it controlled both mycorrhizal andpathogenic fungi.)
The key difference appears to be
that Vulpia , unlike the bluebell, has a
highly branched system of roots, andNewsham et al. (1995) go so far as to
propose a continuum of AM function in relation to root archi-tecture, with Vulpia and Hyacinthoides sitting towards the two
extremes. Plants with ﬁnely branched roots have little need for supplementary phosphorus capture, but development of thatsame root architecture provides multiple points of entry forplant pathogens. In such cases AM symbioses are therefore likelyto have evolved with an emphasis on plant protection. By 
contrast, root systems with few lateral and actively growingmeristems are relatively invulnerable to pathogen attack, butthese root systems are poor foragers for phosphorus. Here, AMsymbioses are likely to have evolved with an emphasis on phos-phorus capture. Of course, even this more sophisticated view of AM function is unlikely to be the whole story: other aspects of AM ecology, such as protection from herbivores and toxic metals, may well vary in ways unrelated to root architecture.
13.8.3 Ericoid mycorrhizas
Heathlands exist in environments characterized by soils with
low levels of available plant nutrients, often as a result of regu-lar ﬁres in which, for example, up to 80% of the nitrogen thathas accumulated between ﬁres may be lost. It is unsurprising, there-fore, that heathlands are dominated by many plants that have
evolved an association with ericoid mycorrhizal fungi (Read,1996). This enables them to facilitate the extraction of nitrogenand phosphorus from the superﬁcial layers of detrital material generated by the plants. Indeed, the conservation of naturalheathlands is threatened by nitrogen supplementation and ﬁre control, which allow colonization and domination by grassesthat would otherwise be unable to exist in these impoverishedenvironments.The ericoid mycorrhizal root itself is anatomically simple
compared to other mycorrhizas, characterized by a reduction of
its vascular and cortical tissues, by the absence of root hairs, andby the presence of swollen epidermal cells occupied by mycorrhizalfungi. As a result, the individual roots are delicate structures, oftenreferred to as ‘hair-roots’; collectively the hair-roots form a denseﬁbrous root system, the bulk of which is concentrated towardsthe surface of the soil proﬁle (Pate, 1994). The fungi are effect-ive, unlike the plants alone, in absorbing nitrate, ammonium andphosphate ions that have been mobilized by other decomposersin the soil (see Chapter 11), but crucially they are also ‘saprotrophic’.They are therefore able to compete directly with the otherdecomposers in liberating nitrogen and phosphorus from theorganic residues in which most of these elements are locked 
up in heathland ecosystems (Read, 1996). A mutualism can thus be seen, again, to be woven into a larger web of interactions: thesymbiont enhances its contribution to the host by making a preemptive competitive strike for scarce inorganic resources,and its own competitive ability is presumably enhanced in turnby the physiological support provided by its host.
13.9 Fungi with algae: the lichens
Of the 70,000 or so species of fungus that
are known, approximately 20% are‘lichenized’ (Palmqvist, 2000). Lichensare nutritionally specialized fungi (theso-called ‘mycobiont’ component) that have escaped from their
normal way of life into a mutualistic association with a ‘photo-biont’. In around 90% of lichen species the photobiont is an alga,which provides carbon compounds to the mycobiont through photosynthesis. In some cases, the photobiont is a cyanobacterium,which may also provide ﬁxed nitrogen to the association. In a relatively few, ‘tripartite’ lichen species (around 500) both an algaand a cyanobacterium are involved. Lichenized fungi belong to diverse taxonomic groups and the mutualistic algae to 27 dif-ferent genera. Presumably, the lichen habit has evolved many 
times.
The photobionts are located extracellularly between the 
fungal hyphae, in a thin layer near the upper surface. Together,the two components form an integrated ‘thallus’ but the photo-biont makes up only about 3–10% by weight. The advantage tothe photobiont in the association, if any, has not been establishedclearly. All lichenized algal species, for example, can also occurfree-living outside their association with their mycobiont. It maybe that they are ‘captured’ by the fungus and exploited withoutany recompense. However, some of the species (e.g. of algal genus Trebouxia ) are rare in their free-living form but very 
common in lichens, suggesting that there is something special aboutlife in their mycobiont that they need. Moreover, since minerals, 
including nitrogen, are largely ‘captured’ from what is deposited
••mycobionts and
phytobiontsit depends on the speciesEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 400••SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 401
but synthesis is stimulated when the carbon supply is limiting
(Palmqvist, 2000).
Lichenization, then, gives the mycobiont and the photobiont,
between them, the functional role of higher plants, but in so doingit extends the ecological range of both partners onto substrata (rock
surfaces, tree trunks) and into regions (arid, arctic and alpine) thatare largely barred to higher plants. Indeed, it has been claimedthat lichens dominate 8% of terrestrial communities, both interms of abundance and species diversity. However, all lichensgrow slowly: the colonizers of rock surfaces rarely extend fasterthan 1–5 mm year
−1. They are, though, very efﬁcient accumulators
of the mineral cations that fall or drip onto them, and this makes
them particularly sensitive to environmental contamination byheavy metals and ﬂuoride. Hence, they are amongst the most sensitive indicators of environmental pollution. The ‘quality’ of
an environment in humid regions can be judged rather accuratelyfrom the presence or absence of lichen growth on tombstonesand tree trunks.
One remarkable feature in the life of
the lichenized fungi is that the growthform of the fungus is usually pro-foundly changed when the alga is pre-sent. When the fungi are cultured inisolation from the algae, they grow slowly in compact colonies,
much like related free-living fungi; but in the presence of the algalsymbionts they take on a variety of morphologies (Figure 13.18)that are characteristic of speciﬁc algal–fungal partnerships. Infact, the algae stimulate morphological responses in the fungi thatare so precise that the lichens are classiﬁed as distinct species, anda cyanobacterium and an alga, for example, may elicit quite dif-ferent morphologies from the same fungus.
13.10 Fixation of atmospheric nitrogen in
mutualistic plants
The inability of most plants and animals to ﬁx atmospheric 
nitrogen is one of the great puzzles in the process of evolution,since nitrogen is in limiting supply in many habitats. However,the ability to ﬁx nitrogen is widely though irregularly distributedamongst both the eubacteria (‘true’ bacteria) and the archaea
(archaebacteria), and many of these have been caught up in tight mutualisms with systematically quite different groups ofeukaryotes. Presumably such symbioses have evolved a numberof times independently. They are of enormous ecological import-ance because of nitrogen’s frequent importance (Sprent &Sprent, 1990).
The nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria that
have been found in symbioses (notnecessarily mutualistic) are members
of the following taxa.
••
Figure 13.18 A variety of lichen species on a tree trunk.
Reproduced by permission of Vaughan Fleming/Science Photo
Library.
the range of
nitrogen-ﬁxingbacteriadirectly onto the lichen, often in rainwater and from the ﬂow 
and drip down the branches of trees, and since the surface andbiomass are largely fungal, the mycobiont must contribute thevast bulk of these minerals.
Hence, the mutualistic pairs (and
threesomes) in lichens provide two
striking parallels with higher plants.There is a structural parallel: in plants,
the photosynthetic chloroplasts (see also Section 13.12) are similarly concentrated close to light-facing surfaces. There is also a functional parallel. The economy of a plant relies on carbon produced largely in the leaves and nitrogen absorbedprincipally through the roots, with a relative shortage of carbongiving rise to shoot growth at the expense of roots, and a short-
age of nitrogen leading to root growth at the expense of shoots.Likewise, in lichens, the synthesis of carbon-ﬁxing photobiont cellsis inhibited by a relative shortage of nitrogen in the mycobiont,parallels with higher
plantsremarkablemorphologicalresponses on the fungiEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 401402 CHAPTER 13
1Rhizobia, which ﬁx nitrogen in the root nodules of most 
leguminous plants and just one nonlegume, Parasponia (a
member of the family Ulmaceae, the elms). At least three genera are recognized: Rhizobium , Bradyrhizobium and
Azorhizobium , which are so distinct that they should perhaps
be in different families (Sprent & Sprent, 1990), and between
them they may comprise 10
4or more species.
2Actinomycetes of the genus Frankia , which ﬁx nitrogen in 
the nodules (actinorhiza) of a number of nonleguminous and
mainly woody plants, such as alder ( Alnus ) and sweet gale
(Myrica ).
3Azotobacteriaceae, which can ﬁx nitrogen aerobically and are
commonly found on leaf and root surfaces.
4Bacillaceae, such as Clostridium spp., which occur in ruminant
feces, and Desulfotomaculum spp., which ﬁx nitrogen in mam-
malian guts.
5Enterobacteriaceae, such as Enterobacter and Citrobacter , which
occur regularly in intestinal ﬂoras (e.g. of termites) and occa-sionally on leaf surfaces and on root nodules.
6Spirillaceae, such as Spirillum lipiferum , which is an obligate 
aerobe found on grass roots.
7Cyanobacteria of the family Nostocaceae, which are found in
association with a remarkable range (though rather few species)of ﬂowering and nonﬂowering plants (see Section 13.10.3), andwhich we recently met as photobionts in lichens.
Of these, the association of the rhizobia with legumes is 
the most thoroughly studied, because of the huge agricultural
importance of legume crops.
13.10.1 Mutualisms of rhizobia and leguminous plants
The establishment of a liaison between
rhizobia and legume plants proceedsby a series of reciprocating steps. Thebacteria occur in a free-living state in the
soil and are stimulated to multiply by root exudates and cells that
have been sloughed from roots as they develop. These exudatesare also responsible for switching on a complex set of genes in the rhizobia ( nodgenes) that control the process that induces 
nodulation in the roots of the host. In a typical case, a bacterialcolony develops on the root hair, which then begins to curl andis penetrated by the bacteria. The host responds by laying downa wall that encloses the bacteria and forms an ‘infection thread’,within which the rhizobia proliferate extracellularly. This growswithin the host root cortex, and the host cells divide in advance
of it, beginning to form a nodule. Rhizobia in the infection threadcannot ﬁx nitrogen, but some are released into the host meristemcells. There, surrounded by a host-derived peribacteroid membrane,they differentiate into ‘bacteroids’ that can ﬁx nitrogen. In somespecies, those with ‘indeterminate’ growth like the rhizobia of the pea ( Pisum sativum ), the bacteroids themselves are unable 
to reproduce further. Only undifferentiated rhizobia are released
back into the soil to associate with another root when the original root senesces. By contrast, in species with ‘determinate’growth like those of the soybean ( Glycine max ), bacteroids sur-
vive root senescence and can then invade other roots (Kiers et al. , 2003).
A special vascular system develops in the host, supplying 
the products of photosynthesis to the nodule tissue and carrying
away ﬁxed nitrogen compounds (very often the amino acidasparagine) to other parts of the plant (Figure 13.19). The nitrogen-ﬁxing nitrogenase enzyme accounts for up to 40% of the protein in the nodules and depends for its activity on a very low oxygen tension. A boundary layer of tightly packed cellswithin the nodule serves as a barrier to oxygen diffusion. Ahemoglobin (leghemoglobin) is formed within the nodules, giving the active nodules a pink color. It has a high afﬁnity foroxygen and allows the symbiotic bacteria to respire aerobicallyin the virtually anaerobic environment of the nodule. Indeed, wher-ever nitrogen-ﬁxing symbioses occur, at least one of the partnershas special structural (and usually also biochemical) properties 
that protect the anaerobic nitrogenase enzyme from oxygen, yetallow normal aerobic respiration to occur around it.
13.10.2 Costs and beneﬁts of rhizobial mutualisms
The costs and beneﬁts of this mutualism need to be considered
carefully. From the plant’s point of view, we need to comparethe energetic costs of alternative processes by which supplies ofﬁxed nitrogen might be obtained. The route for most plants isdirect from the soil as nitrate or ammonium ions. The metabol-
ically cheapest route is the use of ammonium ions, but in mostsoils ammonium ions are rapidly converted to nitrates by micro-bial activity (nitriﬁcation). The energetic cost of reducing nitratefrom the soil to ammonia is about 12 mol of adenosine triphos-phate (ATP) per mol of ammonia formed. The mutualistic process (including the maintenance costs of the bacteroids) is energetically slightly more expensive to the plant: about 13.5 molof ATP. However, to the costs of nitrogen ﬁxation itself we mustalso add the costs of forming and maintaining the nodules, which
may be about 12% of the plant’s total photosynthetic output. It is this that makes nitrogen ﬁxation energetically inefﬁcient.Energy, though, may be much more readily available for greenplants than nitrogen. A rare and valuable commodity (ﬁxednitrogen) bought with a cheap currency (energy) may be no badbargain. On the other hand, when a nodulated legume is providedwith nitrates (i.e. when nitrate is not a rare commodity) nitrogenﬁxation declines rapidly.
The beneﬁts to the rhizobia are more problematic from an 
evolutionary point of view, especially for those with indetermin-ate growth, where the rhizobia that have become bacteroids can
•• ••several steps to a
liaisonEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 402SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 403
Vascular system
Point of emergence of nodule from root
Nodule meristem
Developing bacteroid region
Infection thread
Nodule meristem forming
from cortical cells
Cells of nodule primordium, now
infected and differentiating
Infection thread
Inner cortical cells stimulated to divideNodule meristem
Developing bacteroid region
Root hairsEndodermis
Senescent regionCortex
Nodule meristem
Active N2-fixing region
Newly infected region
Figure 13.19 The development of the
root nodule structure during the course of
development of infection of a legume rootby Rhizobium . (After Sprent, 1979.)
ﬁx nitrogen but cannot reproduce. Hence, they cannot themselves
beneﬁt from the symbiosis, since ‘beneﬁt’ must express itself, ultimately, as an increased reproductive rate (ﬁtness). The rhizobiain the infection thread are capable of reproduction (and aretherefore able to beneﬁt), but they cannot ﬁx nitrogen and are
therefore not themselves involved in a mutualistic interaction.However, since the rhizobia are clonal, the bacteroids and the cellsin the infection thread are all part of the same, single genetic entity.The bacteroids, therefore, by supporting the plant and generatinga ﬂow of photosynthates, can beneﬁt the cells of the infectionthread, and hence beneﬁt the clone as a whole, in much the sameway as the cells in a bird’s wing can bring beneﬁt, ultimately, tothe cells that produce its eggs – and hence to the bird as a whole.
One puzzle, though, since the rhi-
zobia associated with a particular plant
are typically a mixture of clones, is why
individual clones do not ‘cheat’: that is, derive beneﬁts from theplant, which itself derives beneﬁt from the rhizobia in general,without themselves entering fully into the costly enterprise of ﬁxingnitrogen. Indeed, we can see that this question of cheating applies
to many mutualisms, once we recognize that they are, in essence,cases of mutual exploitation. There would be evolutionaryadvantage in exploiting without being exploited. Perhaps themost obvious answer is for the plant (in this case) to monitor theperformance of the rhizobia and apply ‘sanctions’ if they cheat.This, clearly, will provide evolutionary stability to the mutualismby preventing cheats from escaping the interaction, and evidence
for such sanctioning has indeed been found for a legume–rhizobiummutualism (Kiers et al. , 2003). A normally mutualistic rhizobium
strain was prevented from cooperating (ﬁxing nitrogen) bygrowing its soybean host in an atmosphere in which air (80% 
nitrogen, 20% oxygen) was replaced with approximately 80% argon,20% oxygen and only around 0.03% nitrogen, reducing the rateof nitrogen ﬁxation to around 1% of normal levels. Thus, the rhi-zobium strain was forced to cheat. In experiments at the whole
plant, the part-root and the individual nodule level, the reproductivesuccess of the noncooperating rhizobia was decreased by around50% (Figure 13.20). Noninvasive monitoring of the plants indic-ated that they were applying sanctions by withholding oxygen fromthe rhizobia. Cheating did not pay.
13.10.3 Nitrogen-ﬁxing mutualisms in 
nonleguminous plants
The distribution of nitrogen-ﬁxing symbionts in nonleguminous
higher plants is patchy. A genus of actinomycete, Frankia , forms
symbioses (actinorhiza) with members of at least eight familiesof ﬂowering plants, almost all of which are shrubs or trees. The nodules are usually hard and woody. The best known hosts
are the alder ( Alnus ), sea buckthorn ( Hippophaë ), sweet gale
(Myrica ), she-oak ( Casuarina ) and the arctic/alpine shrubs
Arctostaphylos and Dryas. Ceonothus , which forms extensive stands
in Californian chaparral, also develops Frankia nodules. Unlike 
rhizobia, the species of Frankia are ﬁlamentous and produce 
specialized vesicles and sporangia that release spores. Whilst therhizobia rely on their host plant to protect their nitrogenasefrom oxygen, Frankia provides its own protection in the walls of
the vesicles, which are massively thickened with as many as 50
monolayers of lipids.
•• ••why no cheating?EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 403404 CHAPTER 13
Cyanobacteria form symbioses with three genera of liverwort
(Anthoceros ,Blasia and Clavicularia ), with one fern (the free-
ﬂoating aquatic Azolla ), with many cycads (e.g. Encephalartos ) and
with all 40 species of the ﬂowering plant genus Gunnera , but with
no other ﬂowering plants. In the liverworts, the cyanobacteria
Nostoc live in mucilaginous cavities and the plant reacts to their
presence by developing ﬁne ﬁlaments that maximize contact withit. Nostoc is found at the base of the leaves of Gunnera , in the lateral
roots of many cycads, and in pouches in the leaves of Azolla.
13.10.4 Interspeciﬁc competition
The mutualisms of rhizobia and legumes (and other nitrogen-ﬁxing
mutualisms) must not be seen as isolated interactions betweenbacteria and their own host plants. In nature, legumes normally
form mixed stands in association with nonlegumes. These arepotential competitors with the legumes for ﬁxed nitrogen(nitrates or ammonium ions in the soil). The nodulated legumesidesteps this competition by its access to a unique source of nitro-gen. It is in this ecological context that nitrogen-ﬁxing mutualismsgain their main advantage. Where nitrogen is plentiful, however,the energetic costs of nitrogen ﬁxation often put the plants at acompetitive disadvantage.
Figure 13.21, for example, shows
the results of a classic experiment in
which soybeans ( Glycine soja , a legume)
were grown in mixtures with Paspalum ,
a grass. The mixtures either received mineral nitrogen, or wereinoculated with Rhizobium , or received both. The experiment 
•• ••**Rhizobia per half root (× 106)
Nodules060008000(b)
4000
2000
Roots01.01.5
0.5
Water × 10Split-root experiment* *Rhizobia per plant (× 109)
Nodules00.6(a)
0.4
0.2
Roots01.02.0
0.5
SandWhole-plant experiment
1.5
*
*Rhizobia (× 108)(c)
Per
nodule0610
2
Per nodule
massSingle-nodule experiment
8
4*N2:O2
AR:O 2
Figure 13.20 The number of rhizobia grew to much larger numbers when allowed to ﬁx nitrogen in normal air (N2:O2) than when
prevented from doing so by manipulation of the atmosphere (Ar : O2). (a) When the different treatments were applied at the whole 
plant level, there were greater numbers within the nodules (left; P<0.005) and on the root surface (right; both P<0.01) and in the
surrounding sand ( P<0.01). n=11 pairs; bars are standard errors. (b) When the different treatments were applied to different parts 
of the same root system, there were greater numbers within the nodules (left; P<0.001) and for those in the surrounding water (right; 
P<0.01), but not signiﬁcantly so for those on the root surface. n=12 plants; bars are standard errors. (c) When the different treatments
were applied to individual nodules from the same root system, there were greater numbers on a per nodule basis ( P<0.05) and a per
nodule mass basis ( P<0.01). n=6 experiments; bars are standard errors. (After Keirs et al. , 2003.)
a classic ‘replacement
series’EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 404SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 405
was designed as a ‘replacement series’ (see Section 8.7.2), which
allows us to compare the growth of pure populations of the grassand legume with their performances in the presence of each other.In the pure stands of soybean, yield was increased very substan-tially either by inoculation with Rhizobium or by application of 
fertilizer nitrogen, or by receiving both. The legumes can use 
either source of nitrogen as a substitute for the other. The grass,however, responded only to the fertilizer. Hence, when the speciescompeted in the presence of Rhizobium alone, the legume con-
tributed far more to the overall yield than did the grass: over asuccession of generations, the legume would have outcompetedthe grass. When they competed in soils supplemented with fertilizer nitrogen, however, whether or not Rhizobium was also
present, it was the grass that made the major contribution: long
term, it would have outcompeted the legume.
Quite clearly, then, it is in environments deﬁcient in nitrogen
that nodulated legumes have a great advantage over otherspecies. But their activity raises the level of ﬁxed nitrogen in theenvironment. After death, legumes augment the level of soilnitrogen on a very local scale with a 6–12-month delay as theydecompose. Thus, their advantage is lost – they have improvedthe environment of their competitors, and the growth of asso-ciated grasses will be favored in these local patches. Hence,organisms that can ﬁx atmospheric nitrogen can be thought of aslocally suicidal. This is one reason why it is very difﬁcult to growrepeated crops of pure legumes in agricultural practice without
aggressive grass weeds invading the nitrogen-enriched environ-ment. It may also explain why leguminous herbs or trees usuallyfail to form dominant stands in nature.
Grazing animals, on the other hand, continually remove
grass foliage, and the nitrogen status of a grass patch may again
decline to a level at which the legume may once more be at acompetitive advantage. In a stoloniferous legume, such as whiteclover, the plant is continually ‘wandering’ through the sward,leaving behind it local grass-dominated patches, whilst invadingand enriching with nitrogen new patches where the nitrogen status has become low. The symbiotic legume in such a communitynot only drives its nitrogen economy but also some of the cyclesthat occur within its patchwork (Cain et al. , 1995).
13.10.5 Nitrogen-ﬁxing plants and succession
An ecological succession (treated in much more detail in Chap-
ter 17) is the directional replacement of species by other speciesat a site. A shortage of ﬁxed nitrogen commonly hinders the earliest stages of the colonization of land by vegetation: the initial stages of a succession on open land. Some ﬁxed nitrogen
will be contributed in rain after thunderstorms, and some maybe blown in from other more established areas, but nitrogen-ﬁxing
•• ••0102050
40
30–R –N
June 8+R –N –R +N +R +N
0102050
40
30
4
008September 8
2
44
008 24 40 08 24 40 08 24Dry weight per container (g)
GP
GP
GP
GPFigure 13.21 The growth of soybeans
(Glycine soja , G, 7) and a grass ( Paspalum , 
P, /H17033) grown alone and in mixtures with
and without nitrogen fertilizer and with
and without inoculation with nitrogen-ﬁxing Rhizobium. The plants were grown 
in pots containing 0–4 plants of the grass
and 0–8 plants of Glycine. The horizontal
scale on each ﬁgure shows the mass ofplants of the two species in each container.−R−N, no Rhizobium , no fertilizer; +R−N,
inoculated with Rhizobium but no fertilizer;
−R+N, no Rhizobium but nitrate fertilizer
was applied; +R+N, inoculated with
Rhizobium and nitrate fertilizer was
supplied. (After de Wit et al. , 1966.)EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 405406 CHAPTER 13
organisms such as bacteria, cyanobacteria and lichens are import-
ant pioneer colonizers. Higher plants with nitrogen-ﬁxing sym-bionts, however, are rarely pioneers. The reason appears to bethat open land is usually colonized ﬁrst by plants with light, dispersible seeds. A legume seedling, however, depends on ﬁxed
nitrogen in its seed reserves and the soil before it can grow to astage where it can nodulate and ﬁx nitrogen for itself. It is likely,therefore, that only large-seeded legumes carry enough ﬁxednitrogen to carry them through the establishment phase, and specieswith such large seeds will not have the dispersibility needed tobe pioneers (Grubb, 1986; see also Sprent & Sprent, 1990).
Finally, note that since symbiotic nitrogen ﬁxation is ener-
getically demanding, it is not surprising that most of the higher plant species that support nitrogen-ﬁxing mutualists are 
intolerant of the shade that is characteristic of the late stages ofsuccessions. Higher plants with nitrogen-ﬁxing mutualists areseldom in at the beginning of a succession and they seldom persist to the end.
13.11 Models of mutualisms
Several of the previous chapters on interactions have included a
section on mathematical models. This is perhaps a good time toremind ourselves why this was – because the models, by separ-ating essence from detail, were able to provide insights that wouldnot be apparent from a catalog of actual examples. For model-
ing to be a success, then, it is imperative that the ‘essence’ is correctly identiﬁed. What is the essence of a mutualism? One mightimagine it to be that each partner has a positive inﬂuence on the ﬁtness of the other partner. At ﬁrst sight, therefore, we mightimagine that an appropriate model for a mutualistic interactionwould simply replace the negative contributions in models of two-species competition (see Chapter 8) with positive contributions.However, such a model leads to absurd solutions in which bothpopulations explode to unlimited size (May, 1981) because it
places no limits on the carrying capacity of either species, whichwould therefore increase indeﬁnitely. In practice, intraspeciﬁc competition for limiting resources must eventually determine amaximum carrying capacity for any mutualist population, evenif the population of the partner mutualist is present in excess (Dean,1983). Thus, a plant whose growth is limited by a shortage of ﬁxednitrogen may be released into faster growth by mutualism witha nitrogen-ﬁxing partner, but its faster growth must soon becomeconstrained by a shortage of some other limiting resource (e.g.water, phosphate, radiant energy).
This returns us to points made at the start of the chapter: 
that the essence of mutualism is subtler than ‘mutual beneﬁt’.Rather, instead of thinking of each partner as a beneﬁt to the other,
without qualiﬁcation, it is better to think of each partner exploit-ing the other, with beneﬁts to be gained but also costs to pay.And to recognize, too, that the balance of beneﬁts and costs 
can alter – with changing conditions, changing resource levels,the abundance of either partner, and the presence or abundanceof other species. Even the simplest of models, therefore, wouldhave to have terms not signifying a ‘positive contribution’, butterms that could be positive or negative according to the state of some other part of the model community: not simple at allcompared to the models described, and found useful, in previouschapters.
In a sense, then, turning to models
does prove helpful at this point. Models
of predator–prey and competitor pairs inisolation capture an essence of predator–
prey and competitive interactions. The
fact that models of isolated pairs of‘mutualists’ cannot do so re-emphasizes that mutualism is, in termsof population dynamics, essentially an interaction that should
only be viewed within the broader context of a larger commu-nity. We have seen this earlier in the chapter, for example in ants
and aphids in the presence and absence of aphid predators, inSymbiodinium taxa coexisting in coral, and in the legume–
Rhizobium mutualism, which brings its great advantage to the
legume when it is competing with some other plant (e.g. a grass)for limited nitrogen from the soil.
This point has been captured in a
mathematical model, in which a two-species bee–plant pollination mutual-
ism (Figure 13.22a) was examined embedded in a community thatalso contained another species of plant and a species of bird thatpreyed on the bees (Figure 13.22b) (Ringel et al. , 1996). The bees
could either take nectar and pollen from the plants but fail to pol-linate them (predator–prey) or could pollinate them successfully(mutualistic). The model of the simple mutualistic pair (Figure13.22a) was, as described above, intrinsically unstable. The paircould only persist if the strength of intraspeciﬁc competitionexceeded that of mutualism: the more mutualistic the interaction
became, the more unstable it was. Taken at face value, such resultsseem to suggest that mutualisms will be rare (though we haveseen they are not), since the conditions for their existence arerestricted.
A quite different picture emerges, however, once the pair 
is embedded in the larger assemblage (Figure 13.22b). Using a variety of measures, one of which is illustrated and explained in Figure 13.22c, it was apparent that mutualisms tended toincrease the chances of the assemblage’s persistence. Clearly,
there is no necessary paradox between the widespread occur-rence of mutualistic interactions in nature and their effects in model assemblages of species. Equally clearly, though, whilemodel assemblages are inevitably simple (e.g. just ﬁve species),
the effects of mutualistic interactions in nature can easily be misjudged if they are toosimple (i.e. the mutualistic pair alone).
•• ••a bird, a bee and 
two plantsmodels of two-species mutualismsstress the importanceof knowing thebroader contextEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 406SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 407
13.12 Evolution of subcellular structures 
from symbioses
We have seen in this chapter that there is remarkable variety 
in the types of association that may be regarded as symbiotic – many of them shown clearly to be mutualistic. They extend from patterns of behavior linking two very different organismsthat spend parts of their lives apart, through the microbial 
communities of the vertebrate gut (strictly external to the body tissues), to the intercellular ectomycorrhizas and lichens, and the intracellular dinoﬂagellate algae of corals and mycetocytebacteria of insects. We end this chapter by examining how an ecological interaction – mutualism – may lie at the heart of biological patterns operating on the longest evolutionarytimescales.It is now generally accepted that the
origin of the various sorts of eukaryotes
from more primitive ancestors has pro-gressed at least in part through theinextricable merging of partners in a symbiosis. This view waschampioned especially by Margulis (1975, 1996) in the ‘serialendosymbiosis theory’ (Figure 13.23a). The aim is to understand
the relationships between the three ‘domains’ of living organism:
the archaebacteria or Archaea (many of them now ‘extremophiles’,living at high temperatures, low pHs and so on), the ‘true’  bac-teria (Eubacteria) and the eukaryotes (Katz, 1998). One suggestedﬁrst step (estimated to have occurred around 2 billion years ago)was the merger of archaeal and bacterial (spirochete) cells in ananaerobic symbiosis. The former brought its nucleocytoplasm andthe latter brought its swimming motility, thus explaining the
•• ••(c)(a) (b)
Successful trials out of 100,000831
025003000
2000
1500
1000
5002594
1547
1025923Competition for other
sources of food
Other sources
of food
PollinationFood sourceBee
Plant
Intraspecific resource
competitionIntraspecific resource competition
Intraspecific resource competitionOther sources
of food
Food sourcePredationBird
Bee
Plant 2 Plant 1Nectar theftOther sources
of food
Pollination
Food sourceNo mutualism
One strong mutualism
One mutualism
Two strong mutualisms
Two mutualisms
Figure 13.22 (a) A model two-species bee–plant mutualism. Both species are also subject to intraspeciﬁc competition. Filled arrowheads
indicate a positive interaction, either a resource →consumer (pointed) or a pollination (round) interaction; open arrowheads indicate
negative interactions, either consumer →resource or intraspeciﬁc competition. (b) The bee and plant embedded in a community with
another plant and a bird predator of the bees. The plants suffer intraspeciﬁc competition but do not compete with one another. The birds
suffer intraspeciﬁc competition but the bees do not. The bees take pollen and nectar from both plant species and either fail to  pollinate
them (predator–prey) or pollinate them successfully (mutualistic). In the ﬁgure, the interaction with plant 1 is predator–prey and that 
with plant 2 is mutualistic, but cases were examined in which neither, one or both were mutualistic. (c) Comparison of persiste nce in 
the possible assemblages in (b). Persistence of an assemblage is the maintenance of all species at positive population densitie s. The bars
indicate the number that persisted when the dynamics of each assemblage were simulated 10,000 times, with the strengths of each
interaction given by values generated randomly within deﬁned bounds. In a ‘strong mutualism’, the strength of interaction could  be up to
twice that in a ‘mutualism’. Mutualisms greatly increased the chances of persistence; two-tailed t-test of persistence versus no mutualism:
one mutualism ( t=4.52, P<0.001), one strong mutualism ( t=2.21, P<0.05), two mutualisms ( t=30.46, P<0.001), two strong mutualisms
(t=14.78, P<0.001). (After Ringel et al. , 1996.)
the serial
endosymbiosis theoryEIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 407408 CHAPTER 13
chimeric nature – the mix of archaeal and bac-terial features – of
the proteins and the genetic material of even the most primitiveeukaryotes. Subsequently, some of these chimeras incorporatedaerobic bacteria that were the forerunners of mitochondria, tobecome aerobic eukaryotes from which all other eukaryotes
have evolved. Some of these later acquired phototrophic cyano-bacteria that were the forerunners of chloroplasts, providing thestock from which the algae and higher plants evolved.
In fact, the serial endosymbiosis theory is merely one of 
several seeking to link the three domains and recreate the originsof the eukaryotes (Katz, 1998). A suggestion, for instance, that the most primitive eukaryotes have lost mitochondria, rather thannever having had them, calls into question the whole sequentialnature of eukaryote origins. It may also be that the ‘lateral trans-
fer’ of individual genes (from one evolutionary lineage toanother) has been more pervasive over evolutionary time thanwas previously imagined, so that the branching tree of life is infact much more of a tangled web (Figure 13.23b). No doubt, asfurther evidence accumulates, these competing theories willthemselves evolve further, both through progression and the lat-eral transfer of ideas. What they share, however, is the idea thatmutualistic symbioses, beyond their ecological importance, lie atthe heart of some of the most fundamental steps in evolution.
Summary
We start by distinguishing mutualism, symbiosis and commen-
salism and emphasizing that mutualism is best seen as reciprocalexploitation not a cosy partnership.Mutualisms are examined in a progression: from those 
where the association is behavioral, through intimate symbioses
in which one partner enters between or within another’s cells, tothose where organelles have entered into such intimate symbioseswithin the cells of their hosts that they cannot be regarded as distinct organisms.
‘Cleaner’ ﬁsh feed on ectoparasites, bacteria and necrotic 
tissue from the body surface of ‘client’ ﬁsh. The cleaners gain afood source and the clients are protected from infection. Manyant species protect plants from predators and competitors, whilethemselves feeding from specialized parts of the plants, thoughcareful experiments are necessary to show that the plants them-selves beneﬁt.
Many species, including humans, culture crops or livestock 
from which they feed. Ants farm many species of aphids in return
for sugar-rich secretions, though experiments demonstrate thatthere can be both costs and beneﬁts for the aphids. Many antsand beetles farm fungi that give them access to otherwise indi-gestible plant material, and in some cases a three-way mutualismis established with actinomycetes that protect the fungi frompathogens.
Very many plant species use animals to disperse their seeds
and pollen. We emphasize the importance of insect pollinatorsand the coevolutionary pressures generating a range from gen-
eralists to ultraspecialists. We also discuss brood site pollinations,of ﬁgs and yuccas, by ﬁg wasps and yucca moths that rear theirlarvae in the fruits of the pollinated plant.
Many animals support a mutualistic microbiota within their
guts, especially important in the digestion of cellulose. We outlinethe range of active sites, and the complex community of mutu-
•• ••Archaea
Archaeon with
nucleoidmembraneEukaryota Bacteria
Acquisition of
chloroplast
Origin of nucleus,
microtubules and
mitochondria(b)
Spirochaete Endosymbiosis:
motilityEukaryote with
eukaryoticflagellumEf+(a)
EukaryoteEf+
EfMt
Aerobic
bacteriumEndosymbiosis:
respirationEukaryote withmitochondriaN
N
N
Figure 13.23 (a) The ﬁrst two steps in the serial endosymbiosis theory for the origin of the eukaryotic cell. Ef, eukaryote ﬂagellum; 
Mt, mitochondrion; N, nucleus. (b) A model for the origin of eukaryotes indicating a symbiosis between archaeal and bacterial l ineages,
and the possible simultaneous origin of nuclei, microtubules and mitochondria in eukaryotes. Bold lines represent lineage bound aries; 
pale lines are gene genealogies; broken arrows are possible lateral transfers of individual genes. (After Katz, 1998.)EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 408SYMBIOSIS AND MUTUALISM 409
alists, within the guts of a variety of vertebrates and of termites,
focusing especially on the ruminants and noting the importancein many cases of refection. We also describe insect mycetocytesymbioses, especially those between aphids and Buchnera species,
through which microorganisms, mostly bacteria, living in specialized
cells bring nutritional beneﬁts to their insect hosts.
A number of aquatic invertebrates enter into mutualistic
associations with photosynthetic algae, perhaps the most import-ant of which are the reef-building corals. We focus especially on‘coral bleaching’ – the whitening of corals as a result of the lossof the endosymbionts – and its possible relationship with globalwarming, and we emphasize the multi- (not two) species natureof these and many other mutualisms.
A wide variety of symbiotic associations are formed between
higher plants and fungi. We concentrate on the mycorrhizas –
intimate mutualisms between fungi and root tissues – possessedby most plants. We describe ectomycorrhizas, arbuscular mycorrhizasand ericoid mycorrhizas, noting the range of beneﬁts that theycan confer.The biology is outlined of lichens, discussing the intimate 
associations between mycobiont fungi and phytobionts, mostly
algae. Parallels with higher plants are particularly emphasized.
Mutualisms between plants and nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria are of
enormous importance. We outline the range of these bacteria but
focus mainly on the mutualisms of rhizobia and leguminousplants, describing the steps involved in establishing the liaison, thecosts and beneﬁts to both parties, and the role of the mutualismin determining the outcome of competition between legumes and other plants. This leads to a discussion of the part played bynitrogen-ﬁxing plants in ecological successions.
We examine brieﬂy some mathematical models of mutu-
alisms, which re-emphasize the importance of looking beyond twofocal species to the broader context.
Finally, we discuss the possibility that the origin of the various
sorts of eukaryotes from more primitive ancestors has progressed
at least in part through the inextricable merging of partners inmutualistic symbioses.
•• ••EIPC13  10/24/05  2:06 PM  Page 409••14.1 Introduction
Why are some species rare and others common? Why does a
species occur at low population densities in some places and athigh densities in others? What factors cause ﬂuctuations in a species’abundance? These are crucial questions. To provide completeanswers for even a single species in a single location, we might
need, ideally, a knowledge of physicochemical conditions, the levelof resources available, the organism’s life cycle and the inﬂuenceof competitors, predators, parasites, etc., as well as an understand-ing of how all these things inﬂuence abundance through their effects on the rates of birth, death and movement. In previouschapters, we have examined each of these topics separately. Wenow bring them together to see how we might discover whichfactors actually matter in particular examples.
The raw material for the study of
abundance is usually some estimate of
population size. In its crudest form,this consists of a simple count. But this
can hide vital information. As an example, picture three humanpopulations containing identical numbers of individuals. One ofthese is an old people’s residential area, the second is a popula-tion of young children, and the third is a population of mixed age and sex. No amount of attempted correlation with factors outside the population would reveal that the ﬁrst was doomedto extinction (unless maintained by immigration), the secondwould grow fast but only after a delay, and the third would con-tinue to grow steadily. More detailed studies, therefore, involverecognizing individuals of different age, sex, size and dominance
and even distinguishing genetic variants.
Ecologists usually have to deal 
with estimates of abundance that aredeﬁcient. First, data may be misleadingunless sampling is adequate over both
space and time, and adequacy of either usually requires great commitment of time and money. The lifetime of investigators,
the hurry to produce publishable work and the short tenure ofmost research programs all deter individuals from even startingto conduct studies over extended periods of time. Moreover, asknowledge about populations grows, so the number of attributesof interest grows and changes; every study risks being out of date almost as soon as it begins. In particular, it is usually a 
technically formidable task to follow individuals in a population
throughout their lives. Often, a crucial stage in the life cycle ishidden from view – baby rabbits within their warrens or seedsin the soil. It is possible to mark birds with numbered leg rings,roving carnivores with radiotransmitters or seeds with radioact-ive isotopes, but the species and the numbers that can be studiedin this way are severely limited.
A large part of population theory
depends on the relatively few exceptions
where logistical difﬁculties have beenovercome (Taylor, 1987). In fact, mostof the really long-term or geographically extensive studies of abundance have been made of organisms of economic import-ance such as fur-bearing animals, game birds and pests, or the furry and feathered favorites of amateur naturalists. Insofar as generalizations emerge, we should treat them with great caution.
14.1.1 Correlation, causation and experimentation
Abundance data may be used to establish correlations with 
external factors (e.g. the weather) or correlations between featureswithin the abundance data themselves (e.g. correlating numberspresent in the spring with those present in the fall). Correlationsmay be used to predict the future. For example, high intens-
ities of the disease ‘late blight’ in the canopy of potato crops usually occur 15–22 days after a period in which the minimum counting is not
enough
estimates are usuallydeﬁcientstudied species maynot be typical
Chapter 14
Abundance
EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 410ABUNDANCE 411
temperature is not less than 10°C and the relative humidity is 
more than 75% for two consecutive days. Such a correlation may alert the grower to the need for protective spraying.
Correlations may also be used to suggest, although not to prove,
causal relationships. For example, a correlation may be demon-
strated between the size of a population and its growth rate. Thecorrelation may hint that it is the size of the population itself that causes the growth rate to change, but, ultimately, ‘cause’requires a mechanism. It may be that when the population is highmany individuals starve to death, or fail to reproduce, or becomeaggressive and drive out the weaker members.
In particular, as we have remarked
previously, many of the studies thatwe discuss in this and other chapters
have been concerned to detect ‘density-
dependent’ processes, as if density itself is the cause of changesin birth rates and death rates in a population. But this will rarely (if ever) be the case: organisms do not detect and respondto the density of their populations. They usually respond to a shortage of resources caused by neighbors or to aggression. We may not be able to identify which individuals have been 
responsible for the harm done to others, but we need continu-ally to remember that ‘density’ is often an abstraction that con-ceals what the world is like as experienced in the lives of real organisms.
Observing directly what is happening to the individuals may
suggest more strongly still what causes a change in overall abund-
ance. Incorporating observations on individuals into mathematicalmodels of populations, and ﬁnding that the model populationbehaves like the real population, may also provide strong supportfor a particular hypothesis. But often, the acid test comes whenit is possible to carry out a ﬁeld experiment or manipulation. Ifwe suspect that predators or competitors determine the size of apopulation, we can ask what happens if we remove them. If wesuspect that a resource limits the size of a population, we can addmore of it. Besides indicating the adequacy of our hypotheses, theresults of such experiments may show that we ourselves have the power to determine a population’s size: to reduce the density of a pest or weed, or to increase the density of an endan-gered species. Ecology becomes a predictive science when it canforecast the future: it becomes a management science when it can determine the future.
14.2 Fluctuation or stability?
Perhaps the direct observations of
abundance that span the greatest period
of time are those of the swifts ( Micropus apus ) in the village of
Selborne in southern England (Lawton & May, 1984). In one ofthe earliest published works on ecology, Gilbert White, who lived
in the village, wrote of the swifts in 1778:I am now conﬁrmed in the opinion that we have every year
the same number of pairs invariably; at least, the result ofmy inquiry has been exactly the same for a long time past.The number that I constantly ﬁnd are eight pairs, abouthalf of which reside in the church, and the rest in some ofthe lowest and meanest thatched cottages. Now, as theseeight pairs – allowance being made for accidents – breedyearly eight pairs more, what becomes annually of thisincrease?
Lawton and May visited the village in 1983, and found major
changes in the 200 years since White described it. It is unlikely
that swifts had nested in the church tower for 50 years, and thethatched cottages had disappeared or had been covered withwire. Yet, the number of breeding pairs of swifts regularly to befound in the village was found to be 12. In view of the manychanges that have taken place in the intervening centuries, thisnumber is remarkably close to the eight pairs so consistently foundby White.
Another example of a population showing relatively little
change in adult numbers from year to year is seen in an 8-year
study in Poland of the small, annual sand-dune plant Androsace
septentrionalis (Figure 14.1a). Each year there was great ﬂux
within the population: between 150 and 1000 new seedlings per square meter appeared, but subsequent mortality reduced the population by between 30 and 70%. However, the popu-lation appears to be kept within bounds. At least 50 plants always survived to fruit and produce seeds for the next season.
The long-term study of nesting herons in the British Isles
reported previously in Figure 10.23c reveals a picture of a birdpopulation that has remained remarkably constant over longperiods, but here, because repeated estimates were made, it isapparent that there were seasons of severe weather when the 
population declined precipitously before it subsequently recovered.By contrast, the mice in Figure 14.1b have extended periods ofrelatively low abundance interrupted by sporadic and dramaticirruptions.
14.2.1 Determination and regulation of abundance
Looking at these studies, and many others like them, some invest-
igators have emphasized the apparent constancy of population sizes, while others have emphasized the ﬂuctuations. Those whohave emphasized constancy have argued that we need to look for stabilizing forces within populations to explain why they do not
increase without bounds or decline to extinction. Those who haveemphasized the ﬂuctuations have looked to external factors, for example the weather, to explain the changes. Disagreementsbetween the two camps dominated much of ecology in the middle third of the 20th century. By considering some of these
••density is an
abstraction
Gilbert White’s swiftsEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 411412 CHAPTER 14
arguments, it will be easier to appreciate the details of the 
modern consensus (see also Turchin, 2003).
First, however, it is important 
to understand clearly the differencebetween questions about the ways 
in which abundance is determined and
questions about the way in whichabundance is regulated . Regulation is
the tendency of a population to decrease in size when it is abovea particular level, but to increase in size when below that level.In other words, regulation of a population can, by deﬁnition, occuronly as a result of one or more density-dependent processes that
act on rates of birth and/or death and/or movement. Variouspotentially density-dependent processes have been discussed in earlier chapters on competition, movement, predation and parasitism. We must look at regulation, therefore, to understand
how it is that a population tends to remain within deﬁned upperand lower limits.
On the other hand, the precise abundance of individuals will
be determined by the combined effects of all the processes thataffect a population, whether they are dependent or independent ofdensity. Figure 14.2 shows this diagrammatically and very simply.
•• ••distinguishing the
determination andregulation ofabundance
Number of individuals per plot
0
19688001000
Year(a)
600
400
200
1970 1969 1975 1974 1973 1972 1971Abundance index
0
Year(b)
100
50
2000 1998150200250300
1996 1994 1992 1990 1988 1986 1984Beginning of germination
Maximum germinationEnd of seedling phase
Vegetative growth
Flowering
Fruiting
Figure 14.1 (a) The population dynamics
of Androsace septentrionalis during an 8-year
study. (After Symonides, 1979; a more
detailed analysis of these data is given bySilvertown, 1982.) (b) Irregular irruptions
in the abundance of house mice ( Mus
domesticus ) in an agricultural habitat 
in Victoria, Australia, where the mice,when they irrupt, are serious pests. The‘abundance index’ is the number caughtper 100 trap-nights. In fall 1984 the indexexceeded 300. (After Singleton et al. , 2001.)EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 412ABUNDANCE 413
Here, the birth rate is density dependent, whilst the death rate 
is density independent but depends on physical conditions thatdiffer in three locations. There are three equilibrium populations(N
1, N2, N3), which correspond to the three death rates, which in
turn correspond to the physical conditions in the three environ-ments. Variations in density-independent mortality like this wereprimarily responsible, for example, for differences in the abund-ance of the annual grass Vulpia fasciculata on different parts of a
sand-dune environment in North Wales, UK. Reproduction was
density dependent and regulatory, but varied little from site tosite. However, physical conditions had strong density-independenteffects on mortality (Watkinson & Harper, 1978). We must lookat the determination of abundance, therefore, to understand howit is that a particular population exhibits a particular abundanceat a particular time, and not some other abundance.
14.2.2 Theories of abundance
The ‘stability’ viewpoint usually traces
its roots back to A. J. Nicholson, a theo-
retical and laboratory animal ecologist working in Australia (e.g. Nicholson, 1954), believing that density-dependent, biotic interactions play the main role in determining population size,
holding populations in a state of balance in their environments.Nicholson recognized, of course, that ‘factors which are unin-ﬂuenced by density may produce profound effects upon density’(see Figure 14.2), but he considered that density dependence ‘is merely relaxed from time to time and subsequently resumed,and it remains the inﬂuence which adjusts population densitiesin relation to environmental favourability’.The other point of view can be
traced back to two other Australian
ecologists, Andrewartha and Birch(1954), whose research was concerned mainly with the controlof insect pests in the wild. It is likely, therefore, that their viewswere conditioned by the need to predict abundance and, espe-cially, the timing and intensity of pest outbreaks. They believed
that the most important factor limiting the numbers of organismsin natural populations was the shortage of time when the rate ofincrease in the population was positive. In other words, popula-tions could be viewed as passing through a repeated sequence ofsetbacks and recovery – a view that can certainly be applied tomany insect pests that are sensitive to unfavorable environmen-tal conditions but are able to bounce back rapidly. They also rejectedany subdivision of the environment into Nicholson’s density-dependent and density-independent ‘factors’, preferring instead to
see populations as sitting at the center of an ecological web, wherethe essence was that various factors and processes interacted intheir effects on the population.
With the beneﬁt of hindsight, it
seems clear that the ﬁrst camp waspreoccupied with what regulates popu-lation size and the second with whatdetermines population size – and both
are perfectly valid interests. Disagree-ment seems to have arisen because of some feeling within theﬁrst camp that whatever regulates also determines; and some 
feeling in the second camp that the determination of abundanceis, for practical purposes, all that really matters. It is indisputable,however, that no population can be absolutely free of regulation– long-term unrestrained population growth is unknown, and 
•• ••(a) (i)
N*Birth rate (          )
Death rate (          )(ii)
Death rate (          )Birth rate (          )
N*
Population size(iii)
Death rate (          )Birth rate (          )
N*
(b)
Birth rate (          )
Death rate (          )
N1*d3d2d1b
N2* N3*
Population sizeFigure 14.2 (a) Population regulation
with: (i) density-independent birth and
density-dependent death; (ii) density-dependent birth and density-independentdeath; and (iii) density-dependent birth 
and death. Population size increases whenthe birth rate exceeds the death rate anddecreases when the death rate exceeds the birth rate. N*is therefore a stable
equilibrium population size. The actual value of the equilibrium population size is seento depend on both the magnitude of the density-independent rate and the magnitude and slope of any density-dependent process. 
(b) Population regulation with density-dependent birth, b, and density-independent 
death, d. Death rates are determined by 
physical conditions which differ in threesites (death rates d
1, d2and d3). Equilibrium 
population size varies as a result ( N1*, N2*, N3*).
A. J. NicholsonAndrewartha and
Birch
no need fordisagreementbetween thecompeting schools of thoughtEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 413414 CHAPTER 14
unrestrained declines to extinction are rare. Furthermore, any sug-
gestion that density-dependent processes are rare or generally ofonly minor importance would be wrong. A very large numberof studies have been made of various kinds of animals, especiallyof insects. Density dependence has by no means always been
detected but is commonly seen when studies are continued formany generations. For instance, density dependence was detectedin 80% or more of studies of insects that lasted more than 10 years(Hassell et al. , 1989; Woiwod & Hanski, 1992).
On the other hand, in the kind of study that Andrewartha and
Birch focused on, weather was typically the major determinantof abundance and other factors were of relatively minor import-ance. For instance, in one famous, classic study of a pest, the apple thrips ( Thrips imaginis ), weather accounted for 78% of the
variation in thrips numbers (Davidson & Andrewartha, 1948). 
To predict thrips abundance, information on the weather is ofparamount importance. Hence, it is clearly not necessarily the casethat whatever regulates the size of a population also determinesits size for most of the time. And it would also be wrong to giveregulation or density dependence some kind of preeminence. It may be occurring only infrequently or intermittently. Andeven when regulation is occurring, it may be drawing abundancetoward a level that is itself changing in response to changing levels of resources. It is likely that no natural population is evertruly at equilibrium. Rather, it seems reasonable to expect to ﬁndsome populations in nature that are almost always recovering fromthe last disaster (Figure 14.3a), others that are usually limited by
an abundant resource (Figure 14.3b) or by a scarce resource(Figure 14.3c), and others that are usually in decline after suddenepisodes of colonization (Figure 14.3d).
There is a very strong bias towards insects in the data sets 
available for the analysis of the regulation and determination ofpopulation size, and amongst these there is a preponderance ofstudies of pest species. The limited information from other groupssuggests that terrestrial vertebrates may have signiﬁcantly less vari-able populations than those of arthropods, and that populationsof birds are more constant than those of mammals. Large terrestrialmammals seem to be regulated most often by their food supply,whereas in small mammals the single biggest cause of regulationseems to be the density-dependent exclusion of juveniles frombreeding (Sinclair, 1989). For birds, food shortage and competi-tion for territories and/or nest sites seem to be most important.Such generalizations, however, may be as much a reﬂection ofbiases in the species selected for study and of the neglect of theirpredators and parasites, as they are of any underlying pattern.
14.2.3 Approaches to the investigation of abundance
Sibly and Hone (2002) distinguished
three broad approaches that have been used to address questions about the determination and regulation ofabundance. They did so having placed population growth rate at
the center of the stage, since this summarizes the combinedeffects on abundance of birth, death and movement. The demo-
graphic approach (Section 14.3) seeks to partition variations in the
overall population growth rate amongst the phases of survival,birth and movement occurring at different stages in the life cycle.
The aim is to identify the most important phases. However, aswe shall see, this begs the question ‘Most important for what?’The mechanistic approach (Section 14.4) seeks to relate variations
in growth rate directly to variations in speciﬁed factors – food,temperature, and so on – that might inﬂuence it. The approachitself can range from establishing correlations to carrying out ﬁeldexperiments. Finally, the density approach (Section 14.5) seeks to
•• ••(a)
(d)
Time(c)(b)
Population size
Figure 14.3 Idealized diagrams of population dynamics: 
(a) dynamics dominated by phases of population growth after
disaster; (b) dynamics dominated by limitations on environmentalcarrying capacity – carrying capacity high; (c) same as (b) butcarrying capacity low; and (d) dynamics within a habitable site
dominated by population decay after more or less sudden episodesof colonization recruitment.
demographic,
mechanistic anddensity approachesEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 414ABUNDANCE 415
relate variations in growth rate to variations in density. This is a
convenient framework for us to use in examining some of the
wide variety of studies that have been carried out. However, asSibly and Hone’s (2002) survey makes clear, many studies arehybrids of two, or even all three, of the approaches. Lack of space
will prevent us from looking at all of the different variants.
14.3 The demographic approach
14.3.1 Key factor analysis
For many years, the demographic
approach was represented by a tech-nique called key factor analysis . As we
shall see, there are shortcomings in the technique and usefulmodiﬁcations have been proposed, but as a means of explaining
important general principles, and for historical completeness, westart with key factor analysis. In fact, the technique is poorly named,since it begins, at least, by identifying key phases (rather than 
factors) in the life of the organism concerned.
For a key factor analysis, data are
required in the form of a series of lifetables (see Section 4.5) from a numberof different cohorts of the population
concerned. Thus, since its initial development (Morris, 1959;
Varley & Gradwell, 1968) it has been most commonly used forspecies with discrete generations, or where cohorts can otherwisebe readily distinguished. In particular, it is an approach based onthe use of kvalues (see Sections 4.5.1 and 5.6). An example, for
a Canadian population of the Colorado potato beetle ( Leptinotarsa
decemlineata ), is shown in Table 14.1 (Harcourt, 1971). In this species,
‘spring adults’ emerge from hibernation around the middle of June,when potato plants are breaking through the ground. Within 3or 4 days oviposition (egg laying) begins, continuing for about 1
month and reaching its peak in early July. The eggs are laid inclusters on the lower leaf surface, and the larvae crawl to the topof the plant where they feed throughout their development,passing through four instars. When mature, they drop to the groundand pupate in the soil. The ‘summer adults’ emerge in early August,feed, and then re-enter the soil at the beginning of September tohibernate and become the next season’s ‘spring adults’.
The sampling program provided estimates of the population
at seven stages: eggs, early larvae, late larvae, pupae, summer adults,
hibernating adults and spring adults. One further category wasincluded, ‘females ×2’, to take account of any unequal sex ratios
amongst the summer adults. Table 14.1 lists these estimates fora single season. It also gives what were believed to be the maincauses of death in each stage of the life cycle. In so doing, whatis essentially a demographic technique (dealing with phases)takes on the mantle of a mechanistic approach (by associating each
phase with a proposed ‘factor’).
The mean kvalues, determined for
a single population over 10 seasons,are presented in the third column ofTable 14.2. These indicate the relativestrengths of the various factors that contribute to the total rateof mortality within a generation. Thus, the emigration of sum-mer adults has by far the greatest proportional effect ( k
6=1.543),
whilst the starvation of older larvae, the frost-induced mortality
of hibernating adults, the ‘nondeposition’ of eggs, the effects ofrainfall on young larvae and the cannibalization of eggs all playsubstantial roles as well.
What this column of Table 14.2 does not tell us, however, 
is the relative importance of these factors as determinants of the
year-to-year ﬂuctuations in mortality. For instance, we can easily
imagine a factor that repeatedly takes a signiﬁcant toll from a popu-lation, but which, by remaining constant in its effects, plays 
•• ••Numbers per 96 
Age interval potato hills Numbers ‘dying’ ‘Mortality factor’ Log10N k value
Eggs 11,799 2,531 Not deposited 4.072 0.105 ( k1a)
9,268 445 Infertile 3.967 0.021 ( k1b)
8,823 408 Rainfall 3.946 0.021 ( k1c)
8,415 1,147 Cannibalism 3.925 0.064 ( k1d)
7,268 376 Predators 3.861 0.024 ( k1e)
Early larvae 6,892 0 Rainfall 3.838 0 ( k2)
Late larvae 6,892 3,722 Starvation 3.838 0.337 ( k3)
Pupal cells 3,170 16 D. doryphorae 3.501 0.002 ( k4)
Summer adults 3,154 126 Sex (52% /H20038) 3.499 −0.017 ( k5)
/H20038×2 3,280 3,264 Emigration 3.516 2.312 ( k6)
Hibernating adults 16 2 Frost 1.204 0.058 ( k7)
Spring adults 14 1.146
2.926 ( ktotal)Table 14.1 Typical set of life table data
collected by Harcourt (1971) for the
Colorado potato beetle (in this case for Merivale, Canada, 1961–62).key factors? or key
phases?
the Colorado potatobeetlemean kvalues:
typical strengths offactorsEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 415416 CHAPTER 14
little part in determining the particular rate of mortality (and 
thus, the particular population size) in any 1 year. This can beassessed, however, from the next column of Table 14.2, whichgives the regression coefﬁcient of each individual kvalue on the
total generation value, k
total.
A mortality factor that is important
in determining population changeswill have a regression coefﬁcient closeto unity, because its kvalue will tend
to ﬂuctuate in line with k
totalin terms of both size and direction
(Podoler & Rogers, 1975). A mortality factor with a kvalue that
varies quite randomly with respect to ktotal, however, will have a
regression coefﬁcient close to zero. Moreover, the sum of all theregression coefﬁcients within a generation will always be unity.The values of the regression coefﬁcients will, therefore, indicatethe relative strength of the association between different factors
and the ﬂuctuations in mortality. The largest regression coefﬁ-cient will be associated with the key factor causing population
change.
In the present example, it is clear that the emigration of 
summer adults, with a regression coefﬁcient of 0.906, is the key factor. Other factors (with the possible exception of larval starvation) have a negligible effect on the changes in generation mortality, even though some have reasonably high mean k
values. A similar conclusion can be drawn by simply examining
graphs of the ﬂuctuations in kvalues with time (Figure 14.4a).
Thus, whilst mean kvalues indicate the average strengths 
of various factors as causes of mortality in each generation, keyfactor analysis indicates their relative contribution to the yearlychanges in generation mortality, and thus measures their import-
ance as determinants of population size.
What, though, of population regu-
lation? To address this, we examinethe density dependence of each factorby plotting kvalues against log
10of thenumbers present before the factor acted (see Section 5.6). Thus,
the last two columns in Table 14.2 contain the slopes ( b) and
coefﬁcients of determination ( r2) of the various regressions of k
values on their appropriate ‘log10initial densities’. Three factors
seem worthy of close examination. The emigration of summer
adults (the key factor) appears to act in an overcompensating density-dependent fashion, since the slope of the regression (2.65)is considerably in excess of unity (see also Figure 14.4b). Thus,
the key factor, although density dependent, does not so much regulate the population as lead to violent ﬂuctuations in abund-ance (because of overcompensation). Indeed, the Coloradopotato beetle–potato system would go extinct if potatoes werenot continually replanted (Harcourt, 1971).
Also, the rate of larval starvation appears to exhibit under-
compensating density dependence (although statistically this is notsigniﬁcant). An examination of Figure 14.4b, however, shows thatthe relationship would be far better represented not by a linear
regression but by a curve. If such a curve is ﬁtted to the data,then the coefﬁcient of determination rises from 0.66 to 0.97, andthe slope ( bvalue) achieved at high densities would be 30.95
(although it is, of course, much less than this in the range of dens-ities observed). Hence, it is quite possible that larval starvationplays an important part in regulating the population, prior to thedestabilizing effects of pupal parasitism and adult emigration.
Key factor analysis has been applied
to a great many insect populations, butto far fewer vertebrate or plant popu-lations. Examples of these, though, areshown in Table 14.3 and Figure 14.5. In populations of the woodfrog ( Rana sylvatica ) in three regions of the United States (Table 14.3),
the larval period was the key phase determining abundance in each
region (second data column), largely as a result of year-to-yearvariations in rainfall during the larval period. In low rainfallyears, the ponds could dry out, reducing larval survival to cata-strophic levels, sometimes as a result of a bacterial infection. Such
•• ••Mortality factor k Mean k value Regression coefﬁcient on ktotal br2
Eggs not deposited k1a 0.095 −0.020 −0.05 0.27
Eggs infertile k1b 0.026 −0.005 −0.01 0.86
Rainfall on eggs k1c 0.006 0.000 0.00 0.00
Eggs cannibalized k1d 0.090 −0.002 −0.01 0.02
Eggs predation k1c 0.036 −0.011 −0.03 0.41
Larvae 1 (rainfall) k2 0.091 0.010 0.03 0.05
Larvae 2 (starvation) k3 0.185 0.136 0.37 0.66
Pupae ( D. doryphorae ) k4 0.033 −0.029 −0.11 0.83
Unequal sex ratio k5 −0.012 0.004 0.01 0.04
Emigration k6 1.543 0.906 2.65 0.89
Frost k7 0.170 0.010 0.002 0.02
ktotal 2.263Table 14.2 Summary of the life table
analysis for Canadian Colorado beetle
populations. bis the slope of the regression
of each kfactor on the logarithm of the
numbers preceding its action; r2is the
coefﬁcient of determination. See text forfurther explanation. (After Harcourt, 1971.)
regressions of kon
ktotal: key factors
a role for factors in
regulation?wood frogs and anannual plantEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 416ABUNDANCE 417
mortality, however, was inconsistently related to the size of the
larval population (one pond in Maryland, and only approachingsigniﬁcance in Virginia – third data column) and hence played aninconsistent part in regulating the sizes of the populations.Rather, in two of the regions it was during the adult phase that
mortality was clearly density dependent and hence regulatory(apparently as a result of competition for food). Indeed, in twoof the regions mortality was also most intense in the adult phase(ﬁrst data column).
The key phase determining abundance in a Polish population
of the sand-dune annual plant Androsace septentrionalis (Figure 14.5;
see also Figure 14.1a) was found to be the seeds in the soil. Onceagain, however, mortality did not operate in a density-dependent
manner, whereas mortality of seedlings, which were not the keyphase, was found to be density dependent. Seedlings that emergeﬁrst in the season stand a much greater chance of surviving.
Overall, therefore, key factor analysis (its rather misleading name
apart) is useful in identifying important phases in the life cycles
of study organisms. It is useful too in distinguishing the varietyof ways in which phases may be important: in contributingsigniﬁcantly to the overall sum of mortality; in contributingsigniﬁcantly to variations in mortality, and hence in determining
abundance; and in contributing signiﬁcantly to the regulation of
abundance by virtue of the density dependence of the mortality.
•• ••Merivale
Year66–67 65–66 64–65 63–64 62–63 61–624
0123
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
Ottawa67–68 66–67
Richmond68–69 67–68ktotalk6, ktotalk1–5, k7k6
k3k6
k6
k7
k7k1
k1k4k6
k5k5k3k2k2,3ktotalktotal
k1
k7
k5k2k4
(a)
04.0
3.02.01.0
0k
6(b)
2.0 2.5
Log10 summer adults3.0 3.5 01.0
0.80.6
0.40.2
0k
3
2.5 3.0
Log10 late larvae3.5 4.0Figure 14.4 (a) The changes with time 
of the various kvalues of Colorado beetle
populations at three sites in Canada. 
(After Harcourt, 1971.) (b) Density-dependent emigration by Colorado beetle
‘summer’ adults (slope =2.65) (left) and
density-dependent starvation of larvae (slope =0.37) (right). (After Harcourt, 1971.)EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 417•• ••418 CHAPTER 14
Coefﬁcient of Coefﬁcient of regression 
Age interval Mean k value regression on ktotal on log (population size)
Maryland
Larval period 1.94 0.85 Pond 1: 1.03 ( P==0.04)
Pond 2: 0.39 ( P=0.50)
Juvenile: up to 1 year 0.49 0.05 0.12 ( P=0.50)
Adult: 1–3 years 2.35 0.10 0.11 ( P=0.46)
Total 4.78
Virginia
Larval period 2.35 0.73 0.58 ( P=0.09)
Juvenile: up to 1 year 1.10 0.05 −0.20 ( P=0.46)
Adult: 1–3 years 1.14 0.22 0.26 ( P==0.05)
Total 4.59
Michigan
Larval period 1.12 1.40 1.18 ( P=0.33)
Juvenile: up to 1 year 0.64 1.02 0.01 ( P=0.96)
Adult: 1–3 years 3.45 −1.42 0.18 ( P==0.005)
Total 5.21Table 14.3 Key factor (or key phase)
analysis for wood frog populations 
from three areas in the United States:Maryland (two ponds, 1977–82), Virginia(seven ponds, 1976–82) and Michigan 
(one pond, 1980–93). In each area, thephase with the highest mean kvalue, the
key phase and any phase showing densitydependence are highlighted in bold. (After Berven, 1995.)
k3 Seedling mortality
Log number of seedlings0.5
0.4
0.3
2.0 2.5 3.03.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.0
1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975ktotal
k1
k2
k3
k4
k5
k6(0.03)
(1.04)
(–0.40)
(0.15)
(0.03)
(0.05)Generation mortality
Seeds not produced
Seeds failing to germinate
Seedling mortality
Vegetative mortality
Mortality during flowering
Mortality during fruiting
Year4.0
Figure 14.5 Key factor analysis of the sand-dune annual plant Androsace septentrionalis . A graph of total generation mortality ( ktotal) and of
various kfactors is presented. The values of the regression coefﬁcients of each individual kvalue on ktotalare given in brackets. The largest
regression coefﬁcient signiﬁes the key phase and is shown as a colored line. Alongside is shown the one kvalue that varies in a density-
dependent manner. (After Symonides, 1979; analysis in Silvertown, 1982.)EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 418••ABUNDANCE 419
14.3.2 Sensitivities, elasticities and l-contribution
analysis
Although key factor analysis has been
useful and widely used, it has beensubject to persistent and valid criti-
cisms, some technical (i.e. statistical) and some conceptual (Sibly& Smith, 1998). Important among these criticisms are: (i) the rather
awkward way in which kvalues deal with fecundity: a value is
calculated for ‘missing’ births, relative to the maximum possiblenumber of births; and (ii) ‘importance’ may be inappropriatelyascribed to different phases, because equal weight is given to allphases of the life history, even though they may differ in theirpower to inﬂuence abundance. This is a particular problem forpopulations in which the generations overlap, since mortalities(and fecundities) later in the life cycle are bound to have less effecton the overall rate of population growth than those occurring 
in earlier phases. In fact, key factor analysis was designed for specieswith discrete generations, but it has been applied to species with overlapping generations, and in any case, restricting it to theformer is a limitation on its utility.
Sibly and Smith’s (1998) alternative to key factor analysis, 
λ-contribution analysis, overcomes these problems. λis the 
population growth rate (e
r) that we referred to as R, for example,
in Chapter 4, but here we retain Sibly and Smith’s notation. 
Their method, in turn, makes use of a weighting of life cycle phases taken from sensitivity and elasticity analysis (De Kroon et al.,
1986; Benton & Grant, 1999; Caswell, 2001; see also ‘integral pro-
jection models’, for example Childs et al. (2003)), which is itself
an important aspect of the demographic approach to the studyof abundance. Hence, we deal ﬁrst, brieﬂy, with sensitivity andelasticity analysis before examining λ-contribution analysis.
The details of calculating sensitivities
and elasticities are beyond our scope, butthe principles can best be understood byreturning to the population projectionmatrix, introduced in Section 4.7.3.
Remember that the birth and survival processes in a population
can be summarized in matrix form as follows:
where, for each time step, m
xis the fecundity of stage x(into the
ﬁrst stage), gxis the rate of survival and growth from stage xinto
the next stage, and pxis the rate of persisting within stage x.
Remember, too, that λcan be computed directly from this matrix.
Clearly, the overall value of λreﬂects the values of the various
elements in the matrix, but their contribution to λis not equal.
The sensitivity , then, of each element (i.e. each biological process)  pmmm
gp
gp
gp0123
01
12
2300
00
00⎡
⎣⎢
⎢⎢
⎢⎤
⎦⎥
⎥⎥
⎥is the amount by which λwould change for a given absolute change
in the value of the matrix element, with the value of all the other
elements held constant. Thus, sensitivities are highest for thoseprocesses that have the greatest power to inﬂuence λ.
However, whereas survival elements
(gs and ps here) are constrained to lie
between 0 and 1, fecundities are not, and
λtherefore tends to be more sensitive
to absolute changes in survival than to absolute changes of thesame magnitude in fecundity. Moreover, λcan be sensitive to an
element in the matrix even if that element takes the value 0(because sensitivities measure what would happen if there wasan
absolute change in its value). These shortcomings are overcome,though, by using the elasticity of each element to determine its
contribution to λ, since this measures the proportional change in
λresulting from a proportional change in that element. Conveni-
ently, too, with this matrix formulation the elasticities sum to 1.
Elasticity analysis therefore offers
an especially direct route to plans for the
management of abundance. If we wishto increase the abundance of a threat-ened species (ensure λis as high as
possible) or decrease the abundance of a pest (ensure λis as low
as possible), which phases in the life cycle should be the focus of our efforts? Answer: those with the highest elasticities. For example, an elasticity analysis of the threatened Kemp’s ridley seaturtle ( Lepidochelys kempi ) off the southern United States showed
that the survival of older, especially subadult individuals was more
critical to the maintenance of abundance than either fecundity orhatchling survival (Figure 14.6a). Therefore, ‘headstarting’ programs,in which eggs were reared elsewhere (Mexico) and imported, andwhich had dominated conservation practice through the 1980s,seem doomed to be a low-payback management option (Heppellet al. , 1996). Worryingly, headstarting programs have been wide-
spread, and yet this conclusion seems likely to apply to turtlesgenerally.
Elasticity analysis was applied, too, to populations of the 
nodding thistle ( Carduus nutans ), a noxious weed in New Zealand.
The survival and reproduction of young plants were far moreimportant to the overall population growth rate than those of olderindividuals (Figure 14.6b), but, discouragingly, although the bio-control program in New Zealand had correctly targetted thesephases through the introduction of the seed-eating weevil,Rhinocyllus conicus , the maximum observed levels of seed pre-
dation ( c. 49%) were lower than those projected to be necessary
to bring λbelow 1 (69%) (Shea & Kelly, 1998). As predicted, the
control program has had only limited success.
Thus, elasticity analyses are valuable
in identifying phases and processes thatare important in determining abund-ance, but they do so by focusing on typical or average values, and in that
••overcoming problems
in key factor analysis
the populationprojection matrixrevisitedsensitivity andelasticity
elasticity analysis andthe management of abundance
elasticity may saylittle about variations
in abundance . . .EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 419420 CHAPTER 14
sense they seek to account for the typical size of a population.
However, a process with a high elasticity may still play little part,in practice, in accounting for variations in abundance from yearto year or site to site, if that process (mortality or fecundity) showslittle temporal or spatial variation. There is even evidence from
large herbivorous mammals that processes with high elasticity tendto vary little over time (e.g. adult female fecundity), whereas thosewith low elasticity (e.g. juvenile survival) vary far more (Gaillardet al., 2000). The actual inﬂuence of a process on variations in abund-
ance will depend on both elasticity andvariation in the process.
Gaillard et al. further suggest that the relative absence of varia-
tion in the ‘important’ processes may be a case of ‘environmentalcanalisation’: evolution, in the phases most important to ﬁtness,of an ability to maintain relative constancy in the face of envir-
onmental perturbations.In contrast to elasticity analyses,
key factor analysis seeks speciﬁcally to
understand temporal and spatial varia-tions in abundance. The same is true ofSibly and Smith’s λ-contribution ana-
lysis, to which we now return. We can note ﬁrst that it deals 
with the contributions of the different phases not to an overall k
value (as in key factor analysis) but to λ, a much more obvious
determinant of abundance. It makes use of kvalues to quantify
mortality, but can use fecundities directly rather than convertingthem into ‘deaths of unborn offspring’. And crucially, the con-tributions of all mortalities and fecundities are weighted by theirsensitivities. Hence, quite properly, where generations overlap,the chances of later phases being identiﬁed with a key factor 
are correspondingly lower in λ-contribution than in key factor 
•• ••SB S M L1%
31%
33% 3%
1%30%Elasticity
Hatchling00.50.6
Juvenile
Animal survival(a)
Subadult Adult Fecundity0.4
0.30.2
0.18 years
12 years
16 years(b)
SBg1
L Mg4Sg2s1
g3m4m1
m6m5m2m3
SB S M L
SB s1m1m2m3
Sg1m4m5m6
M0 g200
L0 g3g40
Figure 14.6 (a) Results of elasticity analyses for Kemp’s ridley turtles ( Lepidochelys kempi ), showing the proportional changes in λ
resulting from proportional changes in stage-speciﬁc annual survival and fecundity, on the assumption of three different ages o f maturity.
(After Heppell et al. , 1996.) (b) Top: diagrammatic representation of the life cycle structure of Carduus nutans in New Zealand, where SB 
is the seed bank and S, M and L are small, medium and large plants, and sis seed dormancy, gis growth and survival to subsequent 
stages, and mis the reproductive contribution either to the seed bank or to immediately germinating small plants. Middle: the population
projection matrix summarizing this structure. Bottom: the results of an elasticity analysis for one population, in which the pe rcentage
changes in λresulting from percentage changes in s, gand rare shown on the life cycle diagram. The most important transitions are 
shown in bold, and elasticities less than 1% are omitted altogether. (After Shea & Kelly, 1998.)
. . . but 
l-contribution 
analysis doesEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 420ABUNDANCE 421
analysis. As a result, λ-contribution analysis can be used with far
more conﬁdence when generations overlap. Subsequent investi-
gation of density dependences proceeds in exactly the same wayin λ-contribution analysis as in key factor analysis.
Table 14.4 contrasts the results of the two analyses applied to
life table data collected on the Scottish island of Rhum between
1971 and 1983 for the red deer, Cervus elaphus (Clutton-Brock 
et al. , 1985). Over the 19-year lifespan of the deer, survival and
birth rates were estimated in the following ‘blocks’: year 0, years1 and 2, years 3 and 4, years 5–7, years 8–12 and years 13–19. Thisaccounts for the limited number of different values in the k
xand
mxcolumns of the table, but the sensitivities of λto these values
are of course different for different ages (early inﬂuences on λ
are more powerful), with the exception that λis equally sensit-
ive to mortality in each phase prior to ﬁrst reproduction (since 
it is all ‘death before reproduction’). The consequences of these
differential sensitivities are apparent in the ﬁnal two columns of the table, which summarize the results of the two analyses by presenting the regression coefﬁcients of each of the phasesagainst k
totaland λtotal, respectively. Key factor analysis identiﬁes
reproduction in the ﬁnal years of life as the key factor and even
identiﬁes reproduction in the preceding years as the next mostimportant phase. In stark contrast, in λ-contribution analysis, 
the low sensitivities of λto birth in these late phases relegate them
to relative insigniﬁcance – especially the last phase. Instead, sur-
vival in the earliest phase of life, where sensitivity is greatest,becomes the key factor, followed by fecundity in the ‘middle years’where fecundity itself is highest. Thus, λ-contribution analysis 
combines the virtues of key factor and elasticity analyses: distinguishing the regulation and determination of abundance, identifying key phases or factors, while taking account of the differential sensitivities of growth rate (and hence abundance) tothe different phases.
•• ••Table 14.4 Columns 1–4 contain life table data for the females of a population of red deer, Cervus elaphus , on the island of Rhum,
Scotland, using data collected between 1971 and 1983 (Clutton-Brock et al., 1985): xis age, lxis the proportion surviving at the start of 
an age class, kx, killing power, has been calculated using natural logarithms, and mx, fecundity, refers to the birth of female calves. These
data represent averages calculated over the period, the raw data having been collected both by following individually recogniza ble animals
from birth and aging animals at death. The next two columns contain the sensitivities of λ, the population growth rate, to kxand mxin
each age class. In the ﬁnal two columns, the contributions of the various age classes have been grouped as shown. These columns  show
the contrasting results of a key factor analysis and a λcontribution analysis as the regression coefﬁcients of kxand mxon ktotaland λtotal,
respectively, where λtotalis the deviation each year from the long-term average value of λ. (After Sibly & Smith, 1998, where details of 
the calculations may also be found.)
Age (years) at start Sensitivity Sensitivity Regression coefﬁcients of kx, Regression coefﬁcients of kx, 
of class, x lx kx mx of lto kx of lto mx left, and mx, right, on ktotal left, and mx, right, on ltotal
0 1.00 0.45 0.00 −0.14 0.16 0.01, – 0.32, –
1 0.64 0.08 0.00 −0.14 0.09 #0.01, – 0.14, –2 0.59 0.08 0.00 −0.14 0.08 $
3 0.54 0.03 0.22 −0.13 0.07 #0.00, 0.05 0.03, 0.044 0.53 0.03 0.22 −0.11 0.06 $
5 0.51 0.04 0.35 −0.10 0.05 5
6 0.49 0.04 0.35 −0.08 0.05 6 −0.00, 0.03 0.08, 0.16
7 0.47 0.04 0.35 −0.07 0.04 7
8 0.45 0.06 0.37 −0.05 0.04 5
9 0.42 0.06 0.37 −0.04 0.03 4
10 0.40 0.06 0.37 −0.03 0.03 6 0.01, 0.15 0.09, 0.12
11 0.38 0.06 0.37 −0.02 0.02 4
12 0.35 0.06 0.37 −0.02 0.02 7
13 0.33 0.30 0.30 −0.01 0.02 5
14 0.25 0.30 0.30 −0.006 0.01 4
15 0.18 0.30 0.30 −0.004 0.008 4
16 0.14 0.30 0.30 −0.002 0.005 6 −0.05, 0.80 0.01, –0.00
17 0.10 0.30 0.30 −0.001 0.004 4
18 0.07 0.30 0.30 −0.001 0.002 4
19 0.06 0.30 0.30 −0.000 0.002 7EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 421422 CHAPTER 14
14.4 The mechanistic approach
The previous section dealt with analyses directed at phases in the
life cycle, but these often ascribe the effects occurring in particularphases to factors or processes – food, predation, etc. – known tooperate during those phases. An alternative has been to study therole of particular factors in the determination of abundance
directly, by relating the level or presence of the factor (the amountof food, the presence of predators) either to abundance itself or to population growth rate, which is obviously the proximatedeterminant of abundance. This mechanistic approach has theadvantage of focusing clearly on the particular factor, but in sodoing it is easy to lose sight of the relative importance of that factor compared to others.
14.4.1 Correlating abundance with its determinants
Figure 14.7, for example, shows four examples in which popula-
tion growth rate increases with the availability of food. It also suggests that in general, such relationships are likely to level offat the highest food levels where some other factor or factors placean upper limit on abundance.
14.4.2 Experimental perturbation of populations
As we noted in the introduction to this chapter, correlations canbe suggestive, but a much more powerful test of the importanceof a particular factor is to manipulate that factor and monitor 
the population’s response. Predators, competitors or food can 
be added or removed, and if they are important in determiningabundance, this should be apparent in subsequent comparisonsof control and manipulated populations. Examples are discussedbelow, when we examine what may drive the regular cycles ofabundance exhibited by some species, but we should note straightaway that ﬁeld-scale experiments require major investments in time and effort (and money), and a clear distinction betweencontrols and experimental treatments is inevitably much moredifﬁcult to achieve than in the laboratory or greenhouse.
One context in which predators
have been added to a population iswhen biological control agents (naturalenemies of a pest – see Section 15.2.5)
have been released in attempts to con-trol pests. However, because the motivation has been practicalrather than intellectual, perfect experimental design has not 
usually been a priority. There have, for example, been many occa-
sions when aquatic plants have undergone massive population
explosions after their introduction to new habitats, creating signi-
ﬁcant economic problems by block ing navigation channels and 
irrigation pumps and upsetting local ﬁsheries. The population 
explosions occur as the plants grow clonally, break up into 
fragments and become dispersed. The aquatic fern, Salvinia
molesta , for instance, which originated in southeastern Brazil, has
appeared since 1930 in various tropical and subtropical regions.It was ﬁrst recorded in Australia in 1952 and spread very rapidly– under optimal conditions Salvinia has a doubling time of 2.5 days.
•• ••Annual population
growth rate
300–0.30–0.10(c)
–0.20.1
250 200 150 100 50Annual population
growth rate
1000–1.00–0.4(a)
–0.6
–0.8–0.200.20.4
800 600 400 200
1400–2.50–1.00(d)
–1.5
–2.0–0.51.0
0.5
1200 800 600 400 20050–0.8000.4(b)
–0.2
–0.6–0.40.20.60.81.0
40 30 20 10
1000
Food availability Food availability0.2
Figure 14.7 Increases in annual
population grown rate ( r=lnλ) with 
the availability of food (pasture biomass 
(in kg ha−1), except in (b) where it is 
vole abundance and in (c) where it isavailability per capita). (a) Red kangaroo(from Bayliss, 1987). (b) Barn owl (afterTaylor, 1994). (c) Wildebeest (from Krebs
et al. , 1999). (d) Feral pig (from Choquenot,
1998). (After Sibly & Hone, 2002.)biological control: 
an experimentalperturbationEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 422ABUNDANCE 423
Signiﬁcant pests and parasites appear to have been absent. In 1978,
Lake Moon Darra (northern Queensland) carried an infestationof 50,000 tonnes fresh weight of Salvinia covering an area of 400
ha (Figure 14.8).
Amongst the possible control agents collected from Salvinia ’s
native range in Brazil, the black long-snouted weevil ( Cyrtobagous
sp.) was known to feed only on Salvinia. On June 3, 1980, 1500
adults were released in cages at an inlet to the lake and a further
release was made on January 20, 1981. The weevil was free ofany parasites or predators that might reduce its density and, by April 1981, Salvinia throughout the lake had become dark brown.
Samples of the dying weed contained around 70 adult weevils 
per square meter, suggesting a total population of 1000 millionbeetles on the lake. By August 1981, there was estimated to beless than 1 tonne of Salvinia left on the lake (Room et al. , 1981).
This has been the most rapid success of any attempted biolog-
ical control of one organism by the introduction of another, andit establishes the importance of the weevil in the persistently low abundance of Salvinia both after the weevil’s introduction 
to Australia and in its native environment. It was a controlled 
•• ••
Figure 14.8 Lake Moon Darra (North
Queensland, Australia). (a) Covered by
dense populations of the water fern(Salvinia molesta ). (b) After the introduction
of weevil ( Cyrtobagous spp.). (Courtesy 
of P.M. Room.)EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 423424 CHAPTER 14
experiment to the extent that other lakes continued to bear large
populations of Salvinia.
Both the power and the problems 
of ﬁeld-scale experiments are furtherillustrated by an example we have
already discussed in Section 12.7.2, 
in which a ‘predator’ (in this case a parasite) was not added but removed. When Hudson et al. (1998) treated cyclic popula-
tions of the red grouse Lagopus lagopus against the nematode
Trichostrongylus tenuis , the extent of the grouse ‘crash’ was very
substantially reduced, proving the importance of the nematodes,normally, in reducing grouse abundance, and justifying the effortthat had gone into the manipulation. But as we have seen, in spiteof this effort, controversy remained about whether the nematodes
had been proved to be the cause of the cycles (in which case, theresidual smaller crashes were dying echoes) or whether, instead,the experiment had only proved a role for the nematodes in determining a cycle’s amplitude, leaving their role in cyclicity itselfuncertain. Experiments are better than correlations, but when theyinvolve ecological systems in the ﬁeld, eliminating ambiguity cannever be guaranteed.
14.5 The density approach
Correlations with density have not been altogether absent from
the approaches we have considered so far, and indeed, densitydependence played a central role in our discussions of the deter-minants of abundance (birth, death and movement) in earlier chap-ters. Some studies, however, have focused much more ﬁxedly 
on density dependences in their own right. In particular, manysuch studies have been designed to seek evidence for both directand delayed density dependence (see Section 10.2.2). It is a prob-
lem, for example, that conventional life table analyses may failto detect delayed density dependence simply because they are notdesigned to do so (Turchin, 1990). An analysis of population timeseries for 14 species of forest insects detected direct densitydependence clearly in only ﬁve, but it revealed delayed densitydependence in seven of the remaining nine (Turchin, 1990). It may
be that a similar proportion of populations classiﬁed, from theirlife tables, as lacking density dependence are actually subject tothe delayed density dependence of a natural enemy.
14.5.1 Time series analysis: dissecting density
dependence
A number of related approaches have
sought to dissect the density-dependent‘structure’ of species’ populationdynamics by a statistical analysis oftime series of abundance. Abundance ata given point in time may be seen as reﬂecting abundances at 
various times in the past. It reﬂects abundance in the immediatepast in the obvious sense that the past abundance gave risedirectly to the present abundance. It may also reﬂect abundancein the more distant past if, for example, that past abundance gaverise to an increased abundance of a predator, which in duecourse affected the present abundance (i.e. a delayed densitydependence). In particular, and without going into technicaldetails, the log of the abundance of a population at time t, X
t, can
be expressed, at least approximately, as:
Xt=m+(1+β1)Xt–1+β2Xt–2+...+βdXt–d+ut, (14.1)
an equation that captures, in a particular functional form, the idea
of present abundance being determined by past abundances
(Royama, 1992; Bjørnstad et al. , 1995; see also Turchin &
Berryman, 2000). Thus, mreﬂects the mean abundance around
which there are ﬂuctuations over time, β1reﬂects the strength 
of direct density dependence, and other βs reﬂect the strengths
of delayed density dependences with various time lags up to a
maximum d. Finally, utrepresents ﬂuctuations from time-point
to time-point imposed from outside the population, independentof density. It is easiest to understand this approach when the X
ts represent deviations from the long-term average abundance
such that mdisappears (the long-term average deviation from 
the mean is obviously zero). Then, in the absence of any densitydependence (all βs zero) the abundance at time twill reﬂect 
simply the abundance at time t−1 plus any ‘outside’ ﬂuctuations
u
t; while any regulatory tendencies will be reﬂected in βvalues
of less than zero.
Applying this approach to a time
series of abundance (i.e. a sequence of X
tvalues) the usual ﬁrst step is to
determine the statistical model ( Xtas the dependent variable) 
with the optimal number of time lags: the one that strikes thebest balance between accounting for the variations in X
tand not
including too many lags. Essentially, additional lags are includedas long as they account for a signiﬁcant additional element of thevariation. The βvalues in the optimal model may then shed light
on the manner in which abundance in the population is regulated
and determined. An example is illustrated in Figure 14.9, whichsummarizes analyses of 19 time series of microtine rodents (lemmings and voles) from various latitudes in Fennoscandia(Finland, Sweden and Norway) sampled once per year (Bjørnstadet al. , 1995). In almost all cases, the optimum number of lags was
two, and so the analysis proceeded on the basis of these two lags:(i) direct density dependence; and (ii) density dependence with adelay of 1 year.
Figure 14.9a sets out the predicted dynamics, in general, of 
populations governed by these two density dependences (Royama,
1992). Remember that delayed density dependence is reﬂected ina value of β
2less than 0, while direct density dependence is reﬂected
•• ••abundance
determinationexpressed as a time-lag equationFennoscandianmicrotinestreating red grousefor nematodesEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 424ABUNDANCE 425
in a value of (1 +β1) less than 1. Thus, populations not subject to
delayed density dependence tend not to exhibit cycles (Figure 14.9a),
but β2values less than 0 generate cycles, the period (length) of
which tends to increase both as delayed density dependencebecomes more intense (down the vertical axis) and especially asdirect density dependence becomes less intense (left to right onthe horizontal axis).
The results of Bjørnstad et al. ’s
analysis are set out in Figure 14.9b.
The estimated values of β
2for the 19
time series showed no trend as latitude
increased, but the β1values increased
signiﬁcantly. The points combining these pairs of βs, then, are
shown in the ﬁgure, and the trend with increasing latitude isdenoted by the arrow. It was known prior to the analysis, from the data themselves, that the rodents exhibited cycles in
Fennoscandia and that the cycle length increased with latitude.The data in Figure 14.9b point to precisely the same patterns. But in addition, they suggest that the reasons lie in the structureof the density dependences: on the one hand, a strong delayeddensity dependence throughout the region, such as would resultfrom the actions of specialist predators; and on the other hand,a signiﬁcant decline with latitude in the intensity of direct dens-ity dependence, such as may result from an immediate shortageof food or the actions of generalist predators (see Figure 10.11b).
As we shall see in Section 14.6.4 (see also Section 10.4.4), this in turn is supportive of the ‘specialist predation’ hypothesis for microtine cycles. The important point here, though, is the illustration this example provides of the utility of such analyses,
focusing on the abundances themselves, but suggesting under-lying mechanisms.
14.5.2 Time series analysis: counting and 
characterizing lags
In other, related cases, the emphasis shifts to deriving the optimal
statistical model because the number of lags in that model mayprovide clues as to how abundance is being determined. It maydo so because Takens’ theorem (see Section 5.8.5) indicates thata system that can be represented with three lags, for example,
comprises three functional interacting elements, whereas two lagsimply just two elements, and so on.
One example of this approach
(another is described in Section 12.7.1)is the study of Stenseth et al. (1997) of the hare–lynx system in
Canada to which we have already referred brieﬂy in Section10.2.5. We noted there that the optimal model for the hare timeseries suggested three lags, whereas that for the lynx suggestedtwo. The density dependences for these lags are illustrated in Fig-
ure 14.10a. For the hares, direct density dependence was weaklynegative (remember that the slope shown is 1 +β
1) and density
dependence with a delay of 1 year was negligible, but there was
signiﬁcant density dependence with a delay of 2 years. For thelynx, direct density dependence was effectively absent, but therewas strong density dependence with a delay of 1 year.
•• ••Increased direct density dependence–1.01.0
–2(b)
2
1 + β0β20
–1 1–11
–2(a)
2
1 + β10β20Increased delayed
density dependence2.0
2.53.03.5 4.04.55.06.07.08.02.0
Figure 14.9 (a) The type of population dynamics generated by an autoregressive model (see Equation 14.1) incorporating direct 
density dependence, β1, and delayed density dependence, β2. Parameter values outside the triangle lead to population extinction. 
Within the triangle, the dynamics are either stable or cyclic and are always cyclic within the semicircle, with a period (lengt h of cycle) 
as shown by the contour lines. Hence, as indicated by the arrows, the cycle period may increase as β2decreases (more intense delayed
density dependence) and especially as β1increases (less intense direct density dependence). (b) The locations of the pairs of β1and β2
values, estimated from 19 microtine rodent time series from Fennoscandia. The arrow indicates the trend of increasing latitude in the
geographic origin of the time series, suggesting that a trend in cycle period with latitude, from around 3 to around 5 years, i s the result 
of a decreased intensity of direct density dependence. (After Bjørnstad et al. , 1995.)
support for the
specialist predationhypothesis
hares and lynx . . .EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 425••426 CHAPTER 14
This, combined with a detailed
knowledge of the whole community
of which the hare and lynx are part(Figure 14.10b, c), provided justiﬁca-tion for Stenseth et al. (1997) to go on
to construct a three-equation model for the hares and a two-
equation model for the lynx. Speciﬁcally, the model for the lynxcomprised just the lynx and the hares, since the hares are by farthe lynx’s most important prey (Figure 14.10b). Whereas the modelfor the hares comprised the hares themselves, ‘vegetation’ (sincehares feed relatively indiscriminately on a wide range of vegeta-tion), and ‘predators’ (since a wide range of predators feed on thehares and even prey on one another in the absence of hares, addinga strong element of self-regulation within the predator guild as a
whole) (Figure 14.10c).
Lastly, then, and again without going into technical details,
Stenseth et al. were able to recaste the two- and three-equation
models of the lynx and hare into the general, time-lag form ofEquation 14.1. In so doing, they were also able to recaste the β
values in the time-lag equations as appropriate combinations ofthe interaction strengths between and within the hares, the lynx,and so on. Encouragingly, they found that these combinations wereentirely consistent with the slopes (i.e. the βvalues) in Figure 14.10a.
Thus, the elements that appeared to determine hare and lynx abundance were ﬁrst counted (three and two, respectively) andthen characterized. What we have here, therefore, is a power-
ful hybrid of a statistical (time series) analysis of densities and amechanistic approach (incorporating into mathematical modelsknowledge of the speciﬁc interactions impinging on the speciesconcerned).
Finally, note that related methods of time series analysis 
have been used in the search for chaos in ecological systems, as
described in Section 5.8.5. The motivations in the two cases, ofcourse, are somewhat different. The search for chaos, none theless, is, in a sense, an attempt to identify as ‘regulated’ popula-tions that appear, at ﬁrst glance, to be anything but.
14.5.3 Combining density dependence and
independence – weather and 
ecological interactions
Seeking to dissect out the relative con-
tributions of direct and delayed densitydependences, however, could itself beseen as prejudging the determinants of abundance by focusing toomuch on density-dependent, as opposed to density-independent,
processes. Other studies, then, have examined time series pre-cisely with a view to understanding how density-dependent and -independent factors combine in generating particular patterns 
••1+β1 (Xt–1)2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
Xt–110 –1–2–31+β1 (Xt–1)2
1
0
–1
–2
–3–4
X
t–11.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 –0.5 –1.0 –1.5
β2 (Xt–2)2
1
0
–1
–2
–3–4
X
t–210 –1–2–3
β3 (Xt–3)23
1
0
–1
–2
Xt–310 –1–2–3(a) Snowshoe hare
Lynx
β2 (Xt–2)3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
Xt–21.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 –0.5 –1.0 –1.5Figure 14.10 (a) Functions for 
the autoregressive equations (see 
Equation 14.1) for the snowshoe hare,above (three ‘dimensions’: direct densitydependence and delays of 1 and 2 years),
and the lynx, below (two dimensions:direct density dependence and a delay of 1 year). In each case, therefore, the slope indicates the estimated parameters, 1+β
1, β2and β3, respectively, reﬂecting
the intensity of density dependence. The
95% conﬁdence intervals are also shown.
. . . display three and
two dimensions,respectively
multimammate ratsin TanzaniaEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 426••ABUNDANCE 427
••Great horned owl Lynx Coyote
Red fox
Wolverine
Wolf
MooseGolden eagle Hawk owl
Goshawk
Kestrel
Red-tailed hawk
Northern harrier
Fungi
Forbs Grasses Bog birch Grey willow Soapberry White spruce Balsam poplar AspenRed squirrel Ground squirrel Snowshoe hare Willow ptarmigan Passerine birds
InsectsSpruce goose Small rodents(b)
Figure 14.10 (continued ) (b) The main species and groups of species in the boreal forest community of North America, with trophic
interactions (who eats who) indicated by lines joining the species, and those affecting the lynx shown in bold. (c) The same co mmunity,
but with the interactions of the snowshoe hare shown in bold. (After Stenseth et al. , 1997.)Great horned owl
MooseGolden eagle
Kestrel
Fungi
Balsam poplar AspenWillow ptarmigan Passerine birds
InsectsSpruce goose Small rodents(c)
Snowshoe
hareCoyote
Red fox
Wolverine
WolfLynx
Red-tailed hawk
Northern harrierGoshawkHawk owl
Forbs GrassesRed squirrel Ground squirrel
Bog birch Grey willow Soapberry White spruceEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 427428 CHAPTER 14
of abundance. Leirs et al. (1997), for example, have examined 
the dynamics of the multimammate rat, Mastomys natalensis , in
Tanzania. Using one part of their data to construct a predictive
model (Figure 14.11a) and a second part to test that model’s success (Figure 14.11b), they found ﬁrst, in model construc-
tion, that variations in survival and maturation were far betteraccounted for by using both densities and preceding rainfall as predictors than by using either of these alone. In particular (Figure 14.11c), subadult survival probabilities showed no cleartrends with either rainfall or density (though they tended to be higher at higher densities), but maturation rates increasedmarkedly with rainfall (and were lowest at high densities follow-ing wet months), while adult survival was consistently lower at higher densities.
Estimates of demographic parameters (survival, maturation)
from the statistical model were then used to construct a matrix
model of the type described in Section 14.3.2, which was used in turn to predict abundance in the second, separate data set (Figure 14.11b), using rainfall and density there to predict 1 month ahead. The correspondence between the observed andpredicted values was not perfect but was certainly encouraging(Figure 14.11d). Hence, we can see here how the density, mech-
anistic (rainfall) and demographic approaches combine to provideinsights into the determination of the rats’ abundance. Thisexample also reminds us that a proper understanding of abund-ance patterns is likely to require the incorporation of both 
density-dependent, biotic, deterministic effects and the density-independent, often stochastic effects of the weather.
Of course, not all the effects of the
weather are wholly stochastic in thesense of being entirely unpredictable.Apart from obvious seasonal varia-tions, we saw in Section 2.4.1, for example, that there are a num-
ber of climatic patterns operating at large spatial scales and with
at least some degree of temporal regularity, notably the El
Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the North AtlanticOscillation (NAO). Lima et al. (1999) examined the dynamics of
another rodent species, the leaf-eared mouse, Phyllotis darwini , in
Chile and followed a similar path to Leirs and his colleagues in
combining the effects of ENSO-driven rainfall variability anddelayed density dependence in accounting for the observedabundance patterns.
•• ••Monthly rainfall (mm)
Jan0100200(a)
600
450
300
150
0
Population size
May SepJan May SepJan Sep
1989 1988 1987 1986Monthly rainfall (mm)
0100200
Month and year(b)
600
450
300
150
0
Population size
May SepJan May SepJan Sep
1996 1995 1994Adult survival
0.250.75(c)
Dry
LowRain:
Density:Dry
High Low HighWet
LowWet
HighProbability of survivalSubadult maturation
0.250.75Subadult survival
0.250.75
Medium MayJan
Predicted
4000400(d)
0
Observed200
200
Figure 14.11 (a) Time series data for the multimammate rat (dots) and rainfall (bars) in Tanzania, used to derive a statistical model to 
predict rat abundance. (The horizontal line indicates the cut-off between ‘high’ and ‘low’ densities.) (b) Subsequent time seri es 
data used to test that model. (c) Estimates ( ±SE) from the model for the effects of density and rainfall on population size. (d) The 
relationship between predicted and observed population sizes in the test data ( r2=0.49, P<0.001); the line of equality is also shown. 
(After Leirs et al. , 1997.)mice and the ENSO
in ChileEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 428ABUNDANCE 429
14.6 Population cycles and their analysis
Regular cycles in animal abundance were ﬁrst observed in the 
long-term records of fur-trading companies and gamekeepers.Cycles have also been reported from many studies of voles and lemmings and in certain forest Lepidoptera (Myers, 1988).Population ecologists have been fascinated by cycles at least
since Elton drew attention to them in 1924. In part, this fascina-tion is attributable to the striking nature of a phenomenon thatis crying out for an explanation. But there are also sound scientiﬁcreasons for the preoccupation. First, cyclic populations, almost by deﬁnition, exist at different times at a wide range of densities.They therefore offer good opportunities (high statistical power)for detecting such density-dependent effects as might exist, andintegrating these with density-independent effects in an overallanalysis of abundance. Furthermore, regular cycles constitute a
pattern with a relatively high ratio of ‘signal’ to ‘noise’ (compared,say, to totally erratic ﬂuctuations, which may appear to be mostlynoise). Since any analysis of abundance is likely to seek ecolog-ical explanations for the signal and attribute noise to stochasticperturbations, it is obviously helpful to know clearly which is
signal and which is noise.
Explanations for cycles are usually
classiﬁed as emphasizing either ex-trinsic or intrinsic factors. The former, acting from outside the population,
may be food, predators or parasites, or some periodic ﬂuctuationin the environment itself. Intrinsic factors are changes in the phenotypes of the organisms themselves (which might in turn
reﬂect changes in genotype): changes in aggressiveness, in thepropensity to disperse, in reproductive output, and so on. Belowwe examine studies on population cycles in three systems, all ofwhich we have touched on previously: the red grouse (Sec-tion 14.6.2), the snowshoe hare (and lynx) (Section 14.6.3) andmicrotine rodents (Section 14.6.4). In each case, it will be import-ant to bear in mind the problems of disentangling cause from effect;that is, of distinguishing factors that change density from thosethat merely vary with density. Equally, it will be important to 
try to distinguish the factors that affect density (albeit in a cyclicpopulation) from those that actually impose a pattern of cycles(see also Berryman, 2002; Turchin, 2003).
14.6.1 Detecting cycles
The deﬁning feature of a population cycle or oscillation is 
regularity: a peak (or trough) every x years. (Of course, xvaries
from case to case, and a certain degree of variation around xis
inevitable; even in a ‘3-year cycle’, the occasional interval of 2 or4 years is to be expected.) The statistical methods applied to a
time series, to determine whether the claim of ‘cyclicity’ canjustiﬁably be made, usually involve the use of an autocorrelationfunction (Royama, 1992; Turchin & Hanski, 2001). This sets out
the correlations between pairs of abundances one time intervalapart, two time intervals apart, and so on (Figure 14.12a). Thecorrelation between abundances just one time interval apart canoften be high simply because one abundance has led directly tothe next. Thereafter, a high positive correlation between pairs,for example, 4 years apart would indicate a regular cycle with a period of 4 years; while a further high negative correlation
between pairs 2 years apart would indicate a degree of sym-metry in the cycle: peaks and troughs typically 4 years apart; with peaks typically 2 years from troughs.
It must be remembered, however,
that it is not just the pattern of anautocorrelation function that is import-ant but also its statistical signiﬁcance.Even a single clear rise and fall in a relatively short time seriesmay hint at a cycle (Figure 14.12b), but this pattern would needto be repeated in a much longer series before the autocorrelationswere signiﬁcant, and only then could a cycle be said to have beenidentiﬁed (and require explanation). It is no surprise that major
investments in time and effort are required to study cycles in natural populations. Even where those investments have beenmade, the resulting ‘ecological’ time series are shorter than thosecommonly generated in, say, physics – and shorter than those probably envisaged by the statisticians who devised methods foranalyzing them. Ecologists need always to be cautious in theirinterpretations.
14.6.2 Red grouse
The explanation for cycles in the dynamics of the red grouse
(Lagopus lagopus scoticus ) in the United Kingdom has been a matter
of disagreement for decades. Some have emphasized an extrinsicfactor, the parasitic nematode Trichostrongylus tenuis (Dobson &
Hudson, 1992; Hudson et al. , 1998). Others have emphasized an
intrinsic process through which increased density leads to more
interactions between non-kin male birds and hence to moreaggressive interactions. This leads in turn to wider territorial spacing and, with a delay because this is maintained into the next year, to reduced recruitment (Watson & Moss, 1980; Moss& Watson, 2001). Both viewpoints, therefore, rely on a delayeddensity dependence to generate the cyclic dynamics (see Sec-tion 10.2.2), though these are arrived at by very different means.
We have already seen in Sections
12.7.4 and 14.4.2 that even ﬁeld-scale
experiments have been unable to deter-mine the role of the nematodes with certainty. There seems littledoubt that they reduce density, and the results of the experimentare consistent with them generating the cycles, too. But the resultsare also consistent with the nematodes determining the amplitudeof the cycles but not generating them in the ﬁrst place.
•• ••extrinsic and intrinsic
factorsautocorrelationfunction analysis
parasites?EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 429••430 CHAPTER 14
In another ﬁeld experiment, aspects
of the alternative, ‘kinship’ or ‘territo-
rial behavior’ hypothesis were tested(Mougeot et al. , 2003). In experimental
areas, established males were given testosterone implants at the
beginning of the fall, when territorial contests take place. Thisincreased their aggressiveness (and hence the size of their territor-ies) at densities that would not normally generate such aggres-sion. By the end of the fall, it was clear that, relative to the controlareas, the increased aggression of the older males had reducedthe recruitment of the younger males: testosterone treatment hadsigniﬁcantly reduced male densities and had particularly reducedthe ratio of young (newly recruited) to old males, though there
was no consistent effect on female densities (Figure 14.13a).
Moreover, in the following year, even though the direct
effects of the testosterone had worn off, the young males had notreturned (Figure 14.13a). Also, because young relatives had been
driven out, levels of kinship were likely to be lower in experimental
than in control areas. Hence, the kinship hypothesis predicts thatrecruitment and density in the experimental areas should haveremained lower through the following year: that is, lower kinshipleads to more aggression, which leads to larger territories, whichleads to lower recruitment, which leads to lower density. Thesepredictions were borne out (Figure 14.13b).
••kinship, territories
and aggression?
Log numbers
0.81.21.62.02.8
2.4
Time (weeks)V
P
57 50 43 36 29 22 15 8(a)
0.00.4
1
ACF0.8
0.4
0
–0.4
–0.8
Lag number (weeks)Parasite
1 7 13 19 25 31 37 43 49ACF0.8
0.4
0
–0.4
–0.8Host
1 7 13 19 25 31 37 43 49ACF1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
Lag10 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9(b)
log sawfly numbers6
5
4
32
Year
96 94 92 90 88 86 84 82 1980
Figure 14.12 (a) Coupled oscillations in the abundance of the moth Plodia interpunctella and its parasitoid Venturia canescens (P and V,
respectively) and, on the right, an autocorrelation function (ACF) analysis of those data (host above, parasitoid below). Slopi ng lines show
the levels the bars must exceed for statistical signiﬁcance ( P<0.05). The cycle periods ( l) are 6–7 weeks, with signiﬁcant correlations at 
l, 2l, etc. and signiﬁcant negative correlations at 0.5 l, 1.5 l, etc. (After Begon et al. , 1996.) (b) Time series for the abundance of the sawﬂy
Euura lasiolepis (left) and an ACF analysis of those data (right). There is a hint of an 8-year cycle (positive correlation with a lag of 8 year s;
negative correlation with a lag of 4 years), but this does not come close to statistical signiﬁcance (exceeding the lines). (Af ter Turchin &
Berryman, 2000; following Hunter & Price, 1998).EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 430••ABUNDANCE 431
Thus, these results establish, at least, the potential for intrinsic
processes to have (delayed) density-dependent effects on recruit-
ment, and thus to generate cycles in the grouse. In a companionpaper, Matthiopoulos et al. (2003) demonstrate how changes in
aggressiveness can cause population cycles. As Mougeot et al. them-
selves note, though, the possibility remains that both the para-
sites and territorial behavior contribute to the observed cycles.Indeed, the two processes may interact: parasites, for example,reduce territorial behavior (Fox & Hudson, 2001). Certainly, it isfar from guaranteed that either of the alternative explanations willultimately be declared the ‘winner’.
14.6.3 Snowshoe hares
The ‘10-year’ hare and lynx cycles have also been examined 
in previous sections. We have seen, for example, from Stenseth et al. ’s (1997) analysis of time series (see Section 14.5.2) that
despite becoming a ‘textbook’ example of coupled predator–preyoscillations, the hare cycle appears in fact to be generated by 
interactions with both its food and its predators, both consideredas guilds rather than as single species. The lynx cycle, on the otherhand, does indeed appear to be generated by its interaction withthe snowshoe hare.
This supports other results obtained by much more direct, 
experimental means, reviewed by Krebs et al. (2001). The demo-
graphic patterns underlying the hare cycle are relatively clear cut: both fecundity and survival begin to decline well before peak densities are reached, arriving at their minima around 2 years 
after density has started to decline (Figure 14.14).
First, we can ask: ‘What role does the
hares’ interaction with their food playin these patterns?’ A whole series of ﬁeldexperiments in which artiﬁcial food wasadded, or natural food was supple-mented, or food quality was manipu-lated either by fertilizers or by cutting down trees to makehigh-quality twigs available, all pointed in the same direction. Foodsupplementation may improve individual condition and in somecases lead to higher densities, but food by itself seems to have nodiscernible inﬂuence on the cyclic pattern (Krebs et al. , 2001).
On the other hand, experiments in which either predators were
excluded, or they were excluded and food was also supplemented,
had much more dramatic effects. In the study by Krebs et al. (1995)
carried out at Kluane Lake in the Yukon, Canada (Figure 14.15a),the combination of the two treatments all but eliminated the pattern of decline in survival over the cycle from 1988 to 1996,and predation played by far the major role in this.
Furthermore, food supplementation reduced slightly the initial
decline in fecundity prior to peak densities (Figure 14.15b), butthe combination of food supplementation and predator exclusionbrought fecundity up to almost maximum levels at the phase of
••(b)
Per capita recruitment rate2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
YearPopulation 1
2001 2002
Per capita recruitment rate2.0
1.5
1.0
0.50.0
YearPopulation 2
2001
2002Control area
Testosterone area(a)
YearHens per km2Young:old cock ratio
1000.51.01.5
10
2000AugDec AugDec Apr
2001 20020.51.01.5Cocks per km2100
10100
10
100
10
2000AugDec AugDec Apr
2001 2002Population 1 Population 2
Figure 14.13 (a) Changes in grouse numbers (males (cocks); 
the young : old cock ratio; and females (hens)) in control ( 7) and
testosterone-implant experimental areas ( /H17033) in two populations.
The gray bar represents the period of time over which the 
males were given implants. (b) Per capita recruitment in the two populations was higher in the control areas than in theexperimental areas, both in 2001, immediately after treatment, 
and 1 year later. (After Mougeot et al. , 2003.)ﬁeld-scale
manipulations of food and/orpredatorsEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 431432 CHAPTER 14
lowest fecundity following the density peak. Unfortunately, it 
was not possible to measure fecundity in a treatment where onlyfood was supplemented – an example of the disappointments thatalmost inevitably accompany large ﬁeld experiments – so the effectsof food and predators cannot be disentangled. Of these, any
effects of food shortage on fecundity would be easy to understand.It is also possible, though, that an increased frequency of inter-action with predators could reduce fecundity through its physio-logical effects on hares (reduced energy or increased levels of stress-associated hormones).Thus, these hard-won results from
ﬁeld experiments and the analyses of
time series essentially agree in suggesting that the snowshoehare cycle results from interactions with both its food and its pred-ators, with the latter playing the dominant role. It is also noteworthy
that, at least over some periods, there has been a high correlationbetween the hare cycle and the 10-year cycle of sunspot activity,which is known to affect broad weather patterns (Sinclair &Gosline, 1997). This type of extrinsic, abiotic factor was initiallya strong candidate for playing a major role in driving population
•• ••DensityAdult
survivalReproductive output
(no. young/female)
020
19621216(a)
8
1964 1966 1970 1976
Year19744
1972 196808
64
2
Hares per ha
Survival rate per 30 days
0.51.0
0.80.9(b)
0.7
1986 1980
Year19840.6
1982 197808
642
Hares per ha
1996 1990 1994 1992 1998
Figure 14.14 (a) Variation in reproductive output per year (dots) as density (continuous line) changes over a snowshoe hare cycle in
central Alberta, Canada. (b) Variation in survival over two snowshoe hare cycles at Kluane Lake, Yukon, Canada. Too few hares w ere
caught to estimate survival between 1985 and 1987. (After Krebs et al. , 2001; (a) following Cary & Keith, 1979.)
(a)Survival rate per 30 days
96 890.6019881.00
Year0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
05
Hares per ha4
3
2
1
95 94 93 92 91 90(b)No. young per adult female20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
05
Hares per ha4
3
2
1
94 1988 90 92
Year89 91 93 95Controls
Food
Fence + food
Figure 14.15 (a) Survival of radio-collared hares (with 90% conﬁdence intervals) over a hare cycle from 1988 to 1996 at Kluane Lake, 
Yukon, Canada. The bars are densities; lines show the survival in controls ( /H17033) with mammalian predators excluded ( 4) and with mammalian 
predators excluded and food supplemented ( /H17009). (b) Reproductive output over a hare cycle from 1988 to1995 at Kluane Lake (the line). It
was possible to compare control values with those from treatments of food supplementation in 1989 and 1990, and with those wher e food
was supplemented and mammalian predators excluded in 1991 and 1992. (After Krebs et al. , 2001; (a) following Krebs et al. , 1995.)
sunspot cycles?EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 432ABUNDANCE 433
cycles generally (Elton, 1924). Subsequently, however, they have
received little support. In the ﬁrst place, many population cyclesare of the wrong period and are also variable in period (see, forexample, the microtine rodents in the next section). Second, thepopulation cycles are often more pronounced than the extrinsic
cycles that are proposed to be ‘causing’ them. Also, even whena correlation has been established, as in the present case, this simply begs the question of what links the two cycles: pre-sumably it is climate acting on some combination of the factors we have already been considering – predators, food and intrinsic features of the population itself – although no mechanistic basisfor such a link has been established.
Overall, then, the snowshoe hare work illustrates how a
range of methodologies may come together in the search for an
explanation of a cyclic pattern. It also provides a very soberingreminder of the logistical and practical difﬁculties – collecting longtime series, undertaking large ﬁeld experiments – that need to beaccepted and overcome in order to build such explanations.
14.6.4 Microtine rodents: lemmings and voles
There is no doubt that more effort 
has been expended overall in studyingpopulation cycles in microtine rodents(voles and lemmings) than in any other
group of species. Cycle periods are typically 3 or 4 years, or much
more rarely 2 or 5 years or even longer. These cyclic dynamicshave been convincingly identiﬁed in a range of communities, includ-ing the following: voles ( Microtus spp. and Clethrionomys spp.) in
Fennoscandia (Finland, Norway and Sweden); lemmings ( Lemmus
lemmus ) elsewhere in montane habitats in Fennoscandia; lemmings
(Lemmus spp. and Dicrostonyx spp.) in the tundra of North America,
Greenland and Siberia; voles ( Clethrionomys rufocanus ) in Hokkaido,
northern Japan; common voles ( Microtus arvalis ) in central Europe;
and ﬁeld voles ( Microtus agrestis ) in northern England. On the other
hand, there are many other microtine populations that show 
no evidence of multiannual cycles, including voles in southernFennoscandia, southern England, elsewhere in Europe, and manylocations in North America (Turchin & Hanski, 2001). It is alsoworth emphasizing that a quite different pattern, of irregular and spectacular irruptions in abundance and mass movement, isshown by just a few lemming populations, notably in FinnishLapland. It is these whose suicidal behavior has been so grosslyexaggerated (to say the least) in the name of ﬁlm-makers’ poeticlicense, unfairly condemning all lemmings to popular misconception(Henttonen & Kaikusalo, 1993).
Over many decades, the same
range of extrinsic and intrinsic factors
have been proposed to explain micro-
tine cycles as have been directed at population cycles generally.Given the variety of species and habitats, it is perhaps especiallyunlikely in this case that there is a single all-encompassing 
explanation for all of the cycles. None the less, there are a num-ber of features of the cycles that any explanation, or suite of explanations, must account for. First is the simple observation thatsome populations cycle while others do not. Also, there are cases(notably in Fennoscandia) where several coexisting species, oftenwith apparently quite different ecologies, all cycle synchronously.And there are sometimes clear trends in cycle period, notably with increasing latitude (south to north) in Fennoscandia (seeSection 14.5.1), where an explanation has been most intensively
sought, but also for example in Hokkaido, Japan, where cyclicityincreases broadly from southwest to northeast (Stenseth et al., 1996),
and in central Europe, where cyclicity increases from north to south(Tkadlec & Stenseth, 2001).
A useful perspective from which to
proceed is to acknowledge, as we haveseen, that the rodent cycles are theresult of a ‘second-order’ process (Bjørnstad et al. , 1995; Turchin
& Hanski, 2001) (see Section 14.5.1); that is, they reﬂect the 
combined effects of a directly density-dependent process and adelayed density-dependent process. This immediately alerts us tothe fact that, in principle at least, the direct and delayed processesneed not be the same in every cyclic population: what is import-ant is that two such processes act in conjunction.
We start with the ‘intrinsic’ theories. It is not surprising that
voles and lemmings, which can achieve extremely high potentialrates of population growth, should experience periods of over-
crowding. Neither would it be surprising if overcrowding thenproduced changes in physiology and behavior. Mutual aggression(even ﬁghting) might become more common and have con-sequences in the physiology, especially the hormonal balance, ofthe individuals. Individuals may grow larger, or mature later, underdifferent circumstances. There might be increased pressure on someindividuals to defend territories and on others to escape. Kin and non-kin might behave differently to one another when theyare crowded. Powerful local forces of natural selection might 
be generated that favor particular genotypes (e.g. aggressors or escapists). These are responses that we easily recognize incrowded human societies, and ecologists have looked for the samephenomena when they try to explain the population behavior ofrodents. All these effects have been found or claimed by rodentecologists (e.g. Lidicker, 1975; Krebs, 1978; Gaines et al. , 1979;
Christian, 1980). But it remains an open question whether any of them plays a critical role in explaining the behavior of rodentpopulations in nature.
In the ﬁrst place, we saw in Sec-
tions 6.6 and 6.7 the complexities of therelationships in rodents between density,dispersal, relatedness and ultimate survival and reproductive 
success. What is more, by no means all of this work has beencarried out on species that exhibit cycles. Hence, there is little sup-port for any universal rules, but there do seem to be tendencies
•• ••many microtines
cycle – and manydon’t
trends in cyclicitycycles result from asecond-order process
dispersal, relatednessand aggression?EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 433434 CHAPTER 14
for most dispersal to be natal (soon after birth), for males to dis-
perse more than females, for effective dispersal (arriving, ratherthan simply traveling hopefully) to be more likely at lower dens-ities, and for ﬁtness to be greater the greater the relatedness ofneighbors. This has led some in the ﬁeld to argue that the ‘jury
is still out’ (Krebs, 2003), but others have simply doubted any role for these processes in the regulation of rodent populations,especially in view of the frequent inverse density dependence
(Wolff, 2003). Certainly, while variations between individualsmay be associated with different phases of the cycle, this is veryfar from saying that they are driving the cycles. If individuals dis-
perse more at particular cycle phases, say, or are larger, then thisis likely to be a response either to a present or to a past level of
food or space availability, or to predation pressure or infection
intensity. That is, intrinsic variations are more likely to explainthe detailed nature of responses, whereas extrinsic factors are morelikely to explain the causes of the responses.
None the less, in one case at least,
an intrinsic cause has been proposed for the delayed density dependence.
Inchausti and Ginzburg (1998) constructed a model with a‘maternal effect’, in which mothers transmit their body conditionphenotypically to their daughters, either from spring to fall or fromfall to spring, and this in turn determines their per capita rate ofgrowth. Thus, in this case the intrinsic quality of an individual isindeed a response to a past density, and hence to past resourceavailability, accounting for the delayed density dependence. Further-
more, when Inchausti and Ginzburg, focusing on Fennoscandia,fed what they believed to be reasonable values of population growthrate and the maternal effect into their model, both decreasing withlatitude, they were able to recreate cycles with periods varyingfrom 3 to 5 years (Figure 14.16). Turchin and Hanski (2001) criti-cized the parameter estimates (especially those of the growth rates)and claimed that the maternal effect model actually predicted 2-year cycles, at odds with those observed. Ergon et al. (2001) found
with ﬁeld voles, Microtus agrestis , from cyclic populations, that in
transferring them between contrasting sites they rapidly took on characteristics appropriate to their new rather than their oldpopulations – and certainly not those of their mothers. None theless, Inchausti and Ginzburg’s results, set alongside the specialistpredation hypothesis (see Section 14.5.1 and below), emphasizehow the same pattern (here, the latitudinal gradient) might beachieved by quite different means. They also show that intrinsictheories remain ‘in play’ in the continuing search for an explana-tion for microtine cycles.
Turning now to extrinsic factors,
there are two main candidates: pred-ators and food. (Parasites and pathogensexcited Elton’s interest immediately
after his original, 1924 paper, but they were largely ignored subsequently until recent technical advances made their study aserious possibility. It remains to be seen what role, if any, theyplay.) We have already made a start in examining predators inSections 10.4.4 and 14.5.1. Their importance in microtine cycles,expressed as the ‘ specialist predation hypothesis ’, has received con-
siderable support since around 1990 from a series of mathematicalmodels and ﬁeld experiments, especially from workers focusedon the cycles in Fennoscandia. The hypothesis, put simply, is thatspecialist predators are responsible for the delayed density depend-ence, whereas generalist predators, whose importance varieswith latitude, are a major source of direct density dependence.
Early ﬁeld experiments in which
predators were removed (in Fenno-scandia and elsewhere), although they
•• ••Ln fall abundance8
7546(b)
2
80 85 900
100 95–2Ln fall abundance5
7534(a)
2
80 85 901
100 95Ln fall abundance5
7534(c)
2
80 85 900
100
Time (years)95–2–11
Figure 14.16 Behavior of Inchausti and Ginzburg’s (1998)
maternal effect model with differing values of the maximum
yearly reproductive rate, R, and the maternal effect, M, through
which the quality of daughters in one season is affected by thequality of mothers in the previous season (fall or spring). The
simulations are given 75 ‘years’ to settle into a regular pattern. (a) R=7.3; M=15. (b) R=4.4; M=10. (c) R=3.5; M=5. (After
Inchausti & Ginzburg, 1998.)maternal effects?
the specialist
predation hypothesis
experimentalsupport?EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 434ABUNDANCE 435
typically led to 2–3-fold increases in vole density, were subject to
various criticisms of their experimental design: they were shortterm, or small scale, or they affected too many, or too few, ofthe predator species, and they often involved the erection of pro-tective fences that are likely to have affected movements of the
prey (voles) as well (Hanski et al. , 2001). Conclusive experiments
may be a necessity, but this does not make them any easier! Morerecent experiments, too, give rise to some of the same mis-givings. Klemola et al. (2000) excluded all the predators from four
fenced (and net-roofed) exclosures in western Finland, 1 ha in size,for 2 years. The vole populations in the exclosures increased morethan 20-fold in abundance compared to the control grids, untilfood shortages caused them to crash (Figure 14.17a). But the effectsof specialists and generalists were inevitably combined in such a
design; and while results such as these indicate an important rolefor predators in vole survival and abundance, they cannot provea role in causing (as opposed, say, to amplifying) the vole cycles.
Korpimaki et al. (2002), worked in the same area but used four
much larger unfenced areas (2.5–3 km
2) for 3 years, reducing 
predator abundance over the summer but not the winter:mustelids (stoats and weasels) by trapping, and avian predatorsby removing natural and artiﬁcial nesting sites. Predator reduc-tion increased vole density fourfold in the ﬁrst (low) year; it accel-
erated an increase in density twofold in the second year; and itincreased fall density twofold in the third (peak) year (Figure 14.17b).But again, specialists and generalists were not distinguished, andthe temporal pattern of abundance was essentially unaltered.
The specialist predation model itself, which has been success-
ively reﬁned in a series of studies (the reﬁnements are traced by Hanski et al. , 2001) has the following key features: (i) logistic
population growth in the microtine prey, to reﬂect the directlydensity-dependent effects of food shortage on the microtines, 
preventing their populations from growing too large before specialist predators ‘catch up’; (ii) specialist predators (weasels) witha population growth rate that declines as the ratio of specialistpredators to prey increases; (iii) seasonal differences in the breeding of voles and weasels in the summer and winter; and (iv) generalist predators – generalist, switching mammals or wide ranging (nomadic) avian specialists that act in a directly density-dependent manner by responding immediately to changes inmicrotine density. Note, therefore, that the model includes bothof the most-studied extrinsic factors: predators andfood. Food pro-
vides the baseline direct density dependence; specialist predatorsprovide the delayed density dependence. The generalist predatorsthen provide a further source of direct density dependence that
can be varied to mimic their known decline in abundance withlatitude.
When the model is parameterized
with ﬁeld data from Fennoscandia, it canrecreate an impressive number of thefeatures of the observed dynamics. Cycles are of broadly the correct amplitude and period, and both the period and indeed theamplitude of the cycles increase with latitude as the density ofgeneralist predators decreases, as observed in nature (Figure 14.18).A related model for the collared lemming, Dicrostonyx groen-
landicus , preyed upon by one specialist predator (the stoat,
Mustela erminea ) and three generalists (Gilg et al. , 2003) was also
able to recreate observed cycles in Greenland when parameter-ized with ﬁeld data.
On the other hand, not all studies have conformed to the pre-
dictions of the specialist predation model. Lambin et al. (2000)
described regular cycles of ﬁeld voles in Kielder forest, northernEngland (55°N), with a period of 3–4 years and an approximately10-fold difference between peak and trough densities (a differenceof 1 on a log scale, such as on Figure 14.18). Yet, parameterizingthe specialist predation model with the estimated intensity of generalist predation at this site would have predicted no cycleswhatsoever – as would the latitude. What is more, a rigorous 
•• ••YearMean number of voles
per trapline4
3
2
1
0
1997 1998AJAODFAJAODF
1999AJAOYearAbundance per ha800
600
400
200
0
1996 1998 1997
YearJSNJMMJSNJMM(a)
(b)
Figure 14.17 (a) Mean abundances of voles ( ±SE) from four
small predator-exclosure grids ( /H17033) and four control grids ( 7) in
western Finland. (After Klemola et al. , 2000.) (b) The density 
of voles (mean number of individuals caught per trapline, ±SE, 
in April, June, August and October) from four large predator-reduction sites (
/H17033) and four control sites ( 7) in western Finland.
Predator reduction occurred only over the summer and voledensities tended to revert to control levels over the winter. (After Korpimaki et al. , 2002.)supportive
prediction?EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 435436 CHAPTER 14
program of reducing weasel numbers (i.e. specialist predators) 
at unfenced grids within the site (by about 60% in comparisonwith control sites) increased adult vole survival by about 25% buthad no appreciable impact on the cyclic dynamics (Graham &Lambin, 2002).
Lambin and his collaborators conclude from these studies
that generalist predators may not, after all, be responsible for 
the Fennoscandian gradient in cycle length; and that vole cyclesneed not be the result of the impact of specialist (i.e. weasel) predation (since they seem not to be at Kielder). Remember, 
too, that the results of time series analyses (see Section 14.5.1)and predator removal studies in Fennoscandia are consistentwith the specialist predation hypothesis but do not prove it. In contrast, the response to these results of adherents of the 
specialist predation hypothesis (e.g. Korpimaki et al., 2003) has been
to emphasize that the Kielder cycles are different from those in northern Fennoscandia (lower amplitude at Kielder, highertrough densities, less spatial synchrony and only one vole species
•• ••(a) (b)
G = 0
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5ACF
–11
0
G = 50
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5
Lag–11
0log N(t )G = 100
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5 –11
0
G = 150
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5 –11
0
G = 200
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5 –11
0
log N(t )Kilpisjarvi
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5ACF
–11
0log N(t )Sotkamo
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5
Lag–11
0log N(t )Ruotsala
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5 –11
0log N(t )Zvenigorod
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5 –11
0log N(t )Wytham Wood
20002.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
15 10 5 –11
0log N(t ) log N(t ) log N(t ) log N(t )
Time (years) Time (years)
Figure 14.18 (a) Sample data generated by the specialist predation model, and the associated autocorrelation functions (ACFs), for
various values of generalist predator abundance, G. As Gincreases, cycle period increases and cycle amplitude decreases, and at sufﬁciently
high values the dynamics are sufﬁciently stabilized for the cycles to disappear altogether. (b) Comparable time series from ﬁve  ﬁeld sites:
Kilpisjarvi (69°N; period =5), Sotkamo (64°N; period =4), Ruotsala (63°N; period =3), Zvenigorod (57°N; period =3) and Wytham Wood
(51°N; no signiﬁcant periodicity). (After Turchin & Hanski, 1997.)EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 436ABUNDANCE 437
involved). That is, they contend that the results at Kielder may
tell us little or nothing about cycles in Fennoscandia. Though wemay strive to avoid it, even rigorous studies are often open toalternative interpretations.
Turning ﬁnally to the role of food,
both ﬁeld observations and experi-
ments suggest that it would be unwise
to assume that the same forces act on voles and lemmings(Turchin & Batzli, 2001). In the ﬁrst place, voles typically eat arange of vascular plants, including graminoids (grasses andsedges), whereas lemmings feed on a mixture of mosses andgraminoids. Voles seem rarely to consume more than a few per-cent of available plant material (though, of course, the quality ofthe available food might be more important than its quantity –
see, for example, Batzli, 1983); and food supplementation has typically failed to increase vole abundance (though experimentsmay have been foiled by the ‘pantry effect’ through which pred-ators are attracted to high vole densities, counteracting theeffects of supplementation). Lemmings, on the other hand, at peak densities, typically remove more than 50% and sometimes as much as 90–100% of the available vegetation.
Furthermore, through an analysis of models, Turchin and
Batzli (2001) show clearly that the role that vegetation might play in cyclic dynamics depends critically on the nature of the vegetation itself, especially the vegetation’s dynamics followingsigniﬁcant consumption by herbivores. If the dynamics are logistic (i.e. S-shaped) then this may provide the delayed density
dependence necessary to generate ‘second-order’ cycles inmicrotine abundance. But if the dynamics are ‘regrowth’ (i.e. arapid initial response, decelerating until a saturation abundanceis reached) then any density dependence will be direct rather than delayed. In this case, the microtine–food interaction may playan integral part in cyclic dynamics (as they do, for example, inthe specialist predation hypothesis), but it cannot be the second-order driving force. Crucially, plants consumed by voles seem likelyto exhibit rapid regrowth dynamics because of the large propor-tion of unconsumed plant parts, much of it underground. By contrast, mosses are, by their nature, wholly available to their consumers, and when lemmings devastate their vegetation theyoften grub underground for graminoid rhizomes and destroythese too. Lemming vegetation, therefore, is likely to exhibit logistic dynamics: rapid only after a slow start.
On this basis, Turchin and Batzli parameterized a model for
microtines and a food supply with logistic growth, using what data were available for the brown lemming ( Lemmus sibiricus ) and
its vegetation at Barrow, Alaska (Batzli, 1993). The results wereencouraging although not perfect representations of the observedpatterns: cycle amplitudes were too low (400- rather than 600-fold)and too long (6 rather than 4 years). On the other hand, uncer-tainty, and in some cases plain ignorance, surrounded several ofthe parameter estimates. The model can be ‘tweaked’ to gener-ate the observed dynamics. Further painstaking work in the ﬁeld,especially to obtain winter parameter estimates from under the
snow, will be required to determine whether such tweaking isjustiﬁed by the truth about lemming biology.
The cycles of microtines have been studied for longer and with
greater intensity than those of any other species, and have gen-
erated more theories to explain them, and more disagreementsamongst disputing advocates. At the time of writing, a near-consensus appears to have been arrived at that a conjunction of direct and delayed density dependence is required to accountfor observed patterns; and most support is attracted to the con-tention that specialist predators provide the delayed densitydependence, while food shortage and generalist predators providethe direct density dependence. All scientiﬁc ‘conclusions’ areprovisional, however, and fashions change in science as in every-
thing else. It remains to be seen how robust and universal currently fashionable explanations prove to be.
More generally, we started this chap-
ter with a series of questions. Why aresome species rare and others common?Why does a species occur at low population densities in someplaces and at high densities in others? What factors cause ﬂuc-tuations in a species’ abundance? Having reached the end of the chapter, it should be clear that none of these questions has a simple answer. We have seen for particular examples why a spe-cies is rare, or why another varies in abundance from place toplace. But we must not expect the answer to be the same for everyspecies – especially when we start a new study of a species that
demands our attention, perhaps by its excessive abundance (a pest)or declining abundance (a target for conservation). It is crucialnone the less that we have a clear idea of what the possible answers
might be and how we might go about obtaining those answers.The aim of this chapter has been to examine those possibilitiesand how to distinguish them. In the next chapter, we turn explicitlyto some of the pressing examples of populations whose abundancewe need to understand in order to exert some measure of control– be they pests or natural resources that we wish to exploit.
Summary
We bring together topics from previous chapters, seeking to
account for variations in abundance.
Ecologists may emphasize stability or ﬂuctuations. To resolve
these contrasting perspectives, it is necessary to distinguish clearlybetween factors that determine and those that regulate abundance.
In doing so, we review historical conﬂicts between the viewpointsof Nicholson and Andrewartha and Birch. We then outline thedemographic, mechanistic and density approaches to the invest-igation of abundance.
Starting with the demographic approach, we explain key 
factor analysis, its uses, but also its shortcomings. We thereforealso explain λ-contribution analysis, which overcomes some of
•• ••a role for food?
in conclusionEIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 437438 CHAPTER 14
the problems with key factor analysis, and in developing this 
explanation we describe and apply elasticity analysis.
The mechanistic approach relates the level or presence of a
factor (amount of food, presence of predators) either to abund-ance itself or to the population growth rate. This may be simply
correlational, but may alternatively involve the experimentalperturbation of populations. We note that the introduction of abiological control agent is one particular example of this.
Correlations with density are not absent from other approaches,
but the density approach focuses on density dependences in theirown right. We explain how time series analyses seek to dissectdensity dependences, especially the relative strengths of direct anddelayed density dependence when abundance at a given point in time is expressed as reﬂecting abundances at various times in
the past (‘time lags’). We show, too, how related analyses maybe valuable in counting and then characterizing the lags in an optimal description of a time series, and also in evaluating therespective contributions of density-dependent and -independentprocesses (especially weather) in determining abundance.
Regular, multigeneration cycles have in many ways, and for
many years, been the benchmark against which ecologists havetested their ability to understand the determination of abundance.We explain how cycles may be identiﬁed within time series andthen examine three case studies in detail.Red grouse cycles illustrate the difﬁculties of distinguishing
between alternative explanations – parasites and kinship/territorial
behavior – both of which have support.
Work on cycles in snowshoe hares illustrates the coming
together of detailed time series analyses and results obtained 
by much more direct, experimental means. It also provides a very sobering reminder of the logistical and practical difﬁcultiesthat need to be accepted and overcome in order to build explanations.
More effort has been expended in studying population cycles
in microtine rodents (voles and lemmings) than in any other group of species. We describe geographic trends in cyclicity andthe need for an explanation to account for these, and we notethat any such explanation must acknowledge that the cycles are
the result of a ‘second-order’ process: a combination of a directand a delayed density-dependent process. We then examine, inturn, three sets of explanations differing in their source of delayeddensity dependence: (i) ‘intrinsic’ theories, including maternal effects;(ii) the ‘specialist predation hypothesis’, supported by both math-ematical models and ﬁeld experiments, though both of these havealso been subject either to criticism or contradictory evidence; and(iii) theories focused on food, which also have their problems.
We conclude by acknowledging that none of the questions
posed at the beginning of the chapter has simple answers.
••EIPC14  10/24/05  2:08 PM  Page 438••15.1 Introduction
Humans are very much a part of all ecosystems. Our activities
sometimes motivate us to drive towards extinction the species weidentify as pests, to kill individuals of species we harvest for foodor ﬁber while ensuring the persistence of their populations, andto prevent the extinction of species we believe to be endangered.
The desired outcomes are very different for pest controllers, harvest managers and conservation ecologists, but all need man-agement strategies based on the theory of population dynamics.Because much of the tool kit developed to manage endangeredspecies is based on the dynamics of individual populations, wedealt with species conservation in Chapter 7 at the end of the ﬁrstsection of the book, which considered the ecology of individualorganisms and single species populations. Pest controllers and har-vest managers, on the other hand, mostly have to deal explicitly
with multispecies interactions, and their work must be informedby the theory concerning population interactions covered in thebook’s second section (Chapters 8–14). Pest control and harvestmanagement are the topics of the present chapter.
The importance of pest control 
and harvest management has grownexponentially as the human popula-tion has increased (see Section 7.1) and each touches on a different aspectof ‘sustainability’. To call an activity
‘sustainable’ means that it can be continued or repeated for theforeseeable future. Concern has arisen, therefore, precisely becauseso much human activity is clearly unsustainable. We cannot con-
tinue to use the same pesticides if increasing numbers of pestsbecome resistant to them. We cannot (if we wish to have ﬁsh toeat in future) continue to remove ﬁsh from the sea faster thanthe remaining ﬁsh can replace their lost companions.
Sustainability has thus become one of the core concepts – 
perhaps the core concept – in an ever-broadening concern for thefate of the earth and the ecological communities that occupy it.
In deﬁning sustainability we used the words ‘ foreseeable future’.
We did so because, when an activity is described as sustainable,it is on the basis of what is known at the time. But many factorsremain unknown or unpredictable. Things may take a turn forthe worse (as when adverse oceanographic conditions damage aﬁshery already threatened by overexploitation) or some unfore-
seen additional problem may be discovered (resistance may
appear to some previously potent pesticide). On the other hand,technological advances may allow an activity to be sustained thatpreviously seemed unsustainable (new types of pesticide may bediscovered that are more ﬁnely targeted on the pest itself ratherthan innocent bystander species). However, there is a real dangerthat we observe the many technological and scientiﬁc advancesthat have been made in the past and act on the faith that there
will always be a technological ‘ﬁx’ to solve our present problems,too. Unsustainable practices cannot be accepted simply fromfaith that future advances will make them sustainable after all.
The recognition of the importance of sustainability as a uni-
fying idea in applied ecology has grown gradually, but there issomething to be said for the claim that sustainability really cameof age in 1991. This was when the Ecological Society of Americapublished ‘The sustainable biosphere initiative: an ecologicalresearch agenda’, a ‘call-to-arms for all ecologists’ with a list of16 co-authors (Lubchenco et al. , 1991). And in the same year, the
World Conservation Union (IUCN), the United Nations Environ-ment Programme and the World Wide Fund for Nature jointlypublished Caring for the Earth. A Strategy for Sustainable Living
(IUCN/UNEP/WWF, 1991). The detailed contents of these 
documents are less important than their existence. They indicatea growing preoccupation with sustainability, shared by scientists,pressure groups and governments, and recognition that much ofwhat we do is not sustainable. More recently, the emphasis hasshifted from a purely ecological perspective to one that incorporatesthe social and economic conditions inﬂuencing sustainability
‘sustainability’ – 
an aim of both pestcontrollers andharvest managers
Chapter 15
Ecological Applications 
at the Level of Population
Interactions: Pest Control
and Harvest ManagementEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 439440 CHAPTER 15
(Milner-Gulland & Mace, 1998) – this is sometimes referred to as
the ‘triple bottomline’ of sustainability.
In this chapter we deal in turn with the application of popu-
lation theory to the management of pests (Section 15.2) and harvests (Section 15.3). We have seen previously how the details
of spatial structuring of populations can affect their dynamics (see Chapters 6 and 14). With this in mind, Section 15.4 presentsexamples of the application of a metapopulation perspective topest control and harvest management.
We discussed in Chapter 7 how predicted global climate
change is expected to affect species’ distribution patterns. Suchconclusions were based on the mapping of species’ fundamentalniches onto new global patterns of temperature and rainfall. Wewill not dwell on this phenomenon in the current chapter, but it
should be noted that global change will also impact on popula-tion parameters, such as birth and death rates and the timing ofbreeding (e.g. Walther et al. , 2002; Corn, 2003), with implications
for the population dynamics of pest and harvested (and endan-gered) species.
15.2 Management of pests
A pest species is one that humans con-
sider undesirable. This deﬁnition covers
a multitude of sins: mosquitoes are pests because they carry diseases or because their bites itch; Allium spp. are pests because
when harvested with wheat these weeds make bread taste of
onions; rats and mice are pests because they feast on stored food;mustellids are pests in New Zealand because they are unwantedinvaders that prey upon native birds and insects; garden weedsare pests for esthetic reasons. People want rid of them all.
15.2.1 Economic injury level and economic thresholds
Economics and sustainability are 
intimately tied together. Market forcesensure that uneconomic practices arenot sustainable. One might imagine
that the aim of pest control is always total eradication of the pest,
but this is not the general rule. Rather, the aim is to reduce thepest population to a level at which it does not pay to achieve yetmore control (the economic injury level or EIL). Our discussionhere is informed particularly by the theory covered in Chapter 14,which dealt with the combination of factors that determines aspecies’ average abundance and ﬂuctuations about that average.The EIL for a hypothetical pest is illustrated in Figure 15.1a: it isgreater than zero (eradication is not proﬁtable) but it is alsobelow the typical, average abundance of the species. If the species
was naturally self-limited to a density below the EIL, then it wouldnever make economic sense to apply ‘control’ measures, and thespecies could not, by deﬁnition, be considered a ‘pest’ (Figure 15.1b).
There are other species, though, that have a carrying capacity inexcess of their EIL, but have a typical abundance that is kept belowthe EIL by natural enemies (Figure 15.1c). These are potential pests.They can become actual pests if their enemies are removed.
When a pest population has reached
a density at which it is causing economicinjury, however, it is generally too lateto start controlling it. More important,then, is the economic threshold (ET):
the density of the pest at which action should be taken to preventit reaching the EIL. ETs are predictions based either on cost–beneﬁt analyses (Ramirez & Saunders, 1999) and detailed studies
•• ••‘Equilibrium
abundance’
Economic
injury levelPopulation size(a)
Economicinjury level
‘Equilibrium
abundance’Population size(b)
Economic
injury levelPopulation size
TimeNaturalenemiesremoved(c)
Figure 15.1 (a) The population ﬂuctuations of a hypothetical
pest. Abundance ﬂuctuates around an ‘equilibrium abundance’ set
by the pest’s interactions with its food, predators, etc. It makeseconomic sense to control the pest when its abundance exceedsthe economic injury level (EIL). Being a pest, its abundance
exceeds the EIL most of the time (assuming it is not beingcontrolled). (b) By contrast, a species that cannot be a pestﬂuctuates always below its EIL. (c) ‘Potential’ pests ﬂuctuatenormally below their EIL but rise above it in the absence of one or more of their natural enemies.what is a pest?
economic injury level
deﬁnes actual andpotential pests
the economicthreshold – gettingahead of the pestsEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 440ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 441
of past outbreaks, or sometimes on correlations with climatic
records. They may take into account the numbers not only of the pest itself but also of its natural enemies. As an example, inorder to control the spotted alfalfa aphid ( Therioaphis trifolii ) on
hay alfalfa in California, control measures have to be taken at the
times and under the following circumstances (Flint & van denBosch, 1981):
1In the spring when the aphid population reaches 40 aphids 
per stem.
2In the summer and fall when the population reaches 20 aphidsper stem, but the ﬁrst three cuttings of hay are not treated ifthe ratio of ladybirds (beetle predators of the aphids) to aphids
is one adult per 5–10 aphids or three larvae per 40 aphids onstanding hay or one larva per 50 aphids on stubble.
3During the winter when there are 50–70 aphids per stem.
15.2.2 Chemical pesticides, target pest resurgence and
secondary pests
Chemical pesticides are a key part of the armory of pest managers
but they have to be used with care because population theory(see, in particular, Chapter 14) predicts some undesirable responsesto the application of a pesticide. Below we discuss the range ofchemical pesticides and herbicides before proceeding to consider
some undesirable consequences of their use.
15.2.2.1 Insecticides
The use of inorganics goes back to the
dawn of pest control and, along with 
the botanicals (below), they were the
chemical weapons of the expanding army of insect pest managersof the 19th and early 20th century. They are usually metallic 
compounds or salts of copper, sulfur, arsenic or lead – and areprimarily stomach poisons (i.e. they are ineffective as contact poisons) and they are therefore effective only against insectswith chewing mouthparts. This, coupled with their legacy of persistent, broadly toxic metallic residues, has led now to theirvirtual abandonment (Horn, 1988).
Naturally occurring insecticidal plant products, or botanicals ,
such as nicotine from tobacco and pyrethrum from chrysan-themums, having run a course similar to the inorganics, have 
now also been largely superseded, particularly because of theirinstability on exposure to light and air. However, a range of synthetic pyrethroids , with much greater stability, such as per-
methrin and deltamethrin, have replaced other types of organicinsecticide (described below) because of their relative selectivityagainst pests as opposed to beneﬁcial species (Pickett, 1988).
Chlorinated hydrocarbons are contact poisons that affect nerve-
impulse transmission. They are insoluble in water but show a highafﬁnity for fats, thus tending to become concentrated in animal
fatty tissue. The most notorious is DDT: a Nobel Prize wasawarded for its rediscovery in 1948, but it was suspended fromall but emergency uses in the USA in 1973 (although it is still beingused in poorer countries). Others in use are toxaphene, aldrin,
dieldrin, lindane, methoxychlor and chlordane.
Organophosphates are also nerve poisons. They are much
more toxic (to both insects and mammals) than the chlorinatedhydrocarbons, but are generally less persistent in the environment.Examples are malathion, parathion and diazinon.
Carbamates have a mode of action similar to the organophos-
phates, but some have a much lower mammalian toxicity. How-ever, most are extremely toxic to bees (necessary for pollination)and parasitic wasps (the likely natural enemies of insect pests).The best-known carbamate is carbaryl.
Insect growth regulators are chemicals of various sorts that
mimic natural insect hormones and enzymes, and hence interferewith normal insect growth and development. As such, they are
generally harmless to vertebrates and plants, although they maybe as effective against a pest’s natural insect enemies as againstthe pest itself. The two main types that have been used effectivelyto date are: (i) chitin-synthesis inhibitors such as diﬂubenzuron,which prevent the formation of a proper exoskeleton when theinsect molts; and (ii) juvenile hormone analogs such as methoprene,which prevent pest insects from molting into their adult stage,and hence reduce the population size in the next generation.
Semiochemicals are not toxins but chemicals that elicit a
change in the behavior of the pest (literally ‘chemical signs’). 
They are all based on naturally occurring substances, althoughin a number of cases it has been possible to synthesize either thesemiochemicals themselves or analogs of them. Pheromones acton members of the same species; allelochemicals on members ofanother species. Sex-attractant pheromones are used commerciallyto control pest moth populations by interfering with mating(Reece, 1985), whilst the aphid alarm pheromone is used to
enhance the effectiveness of a fungal pathogen against pestaphids in glasshouses in Great Britain by increasing the mobilityof the aphids, and hence their rate of contact with fungal spores(Hockland et al., 1986). These semiochemicals, along with the insect
growth regulators, are sometimes referred to as ‘third-generation’insecticides (following the inorganics and the organic toxins).Their development is relatively recent (Forrester, 1993).
15.2.2.2 Herbicides
Here, too, inorganics were once impor-
tant although they have mostly been
replaced, largely owing to the com-bined problems of persistence and nonspeciﬁcity. However, forthese very reasons, borates for example, absorbed by plant roots
and translocated to above-ground parts, are still sometimes usedto provide semipermanent sterility to areas where no vegetation
•• ••insecticides and how
they work
the tool-kit ofherbicidesEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 441442 CHAPTER 15
of any sort is wanted. Others include a range of arsenicals,
ammonium sulfamate and sodium chlorate (Ware, 1983).
More widely used are the organic arsenicals , for instance disodium
methylarsonate. These are usually applied as spot treatments(since they are nonselective) after which they are translocated to
underground tubers and rhizomes where they disrupt growth.
By contrast, the highly successful phenoxy or hormone weed
killers, translocated throughout the plant, tend to be very muchmore selective. For instance, 2,4-D is highly selective againstbroad-leaved weeds, whilst 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyethanoic acid(2,4,5-T) is used mainly to control woody perennials. Theyappear to act by inhibiting the production of enzymes needed forcoordinated plant growth, leading ultimately to plant death.
The substituted amides have diverse biological properties. 
For example, diphenamid is largely effective against seedlings 
rather than established plants, and is therefore applied to the soilaround established plants as a ‘pre-emergence’ herbicide, prevent-ing the subsequent appearance of weeds. Propanil, on the otherhand, has been used extensively on rice ﬁelds as a selective post-emergence agent.
The nitroanilines (e.g. triﬂuralin) are another group of soil-
incorporated pre-emergence herbicides in very widespread use.They act, selectively, by inhibiting the growth of both roots andshoots.
The substituted ureas (e.g. monuron) are mostly rather 
nonselective pre-emergence herbicides, although some havepost-emergence uses. Their mode of action is to block electron
transport.
The carbamates were described amongst the insecticides, but
some are herbicides, killing plants by stopping cell division andplant tissue growth. They are primarily selective, pre-emergenceweed killers. One example, asulam, is used mostly for grass controlamongst crops, and is also effective in reforestation and Christmastree plantings.
The thiocarbamates (e.g. S-ethyl dipropylthiocarbamate) are
another group of soil-incorporated pre-emergence herbicides,selectively inhibiting the growth of roots and shoots that emergefrom weed seeds.Amongst the heterocyclic nitrogen herbicides, probably the 
most important are the triazines (e.g. metribuzin). These are
effective blockers of electron transport, mostly used for their 
post-emergence activity.
The phenol derivatives , particularly the nitrophenols such as 
2-methyl-4,6-dinitrophenol, are contact chemicals with broad-
spectrum toxicity extending beyond plants to fungi, insects andmammals. They act by uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation.
The bipyridyliums contain two important herbicides, diquat 
and paraquat. These are powerful, very fast acting contact chemicals of widespread toxicity that act by the destruction of cell membranes.
Finally worth mentioning is glyphosate (a glyphosphate herbi-
cide): a nonselective, nonresidual, translocated, foliar-applied
chemical, popular for its activity at any stage of plant growth andat any time of the year.
15.2.2.3 Target pest resurgence
A pesticide gets a bad name if, as is usu-
ally the case, it kills more species thanjust the one at which it is aimed. How-ever, in the context of the sustainabilityof agriculture, the bad name is especially justiﬁed if it kills the
pests’ natural enemies and so contributes to undoing what it wasemployed to do. Thus, the numbers of a pest sometimes increaserapidly some time after the application of a pesticide. This is knownas ‘target pest resurgence’ and occurs when the treatment killsboth large numbers of the pest and large numbers of its natural
enemies (an example is presented below in Figure 15.2). Pest individuals that survive the pesticide or that migrate into the arealater ﬁnd themselves with a plentiful food resource but few, ifany, natural enemies. The pest population may then explode.
Populations of natural enemies will probably eventually re-establish but the timing depends both on the relative toxicity ofthe pesticide to target and nontarget species and the persist-ence of the pesticide in the environment, something that variesdramatically from one pesticide to another (Table 15.1).
•• ••Toxicity
Rat Fish Bird Honeybee Persistence
Permethrin (pyrethroid) 2 4 2 5 2
DDT (organochlorine) 3 4 2 2 5Lindane (organochlorine) 3 3 2 4 4Ethyl parathion (organophosphate) 5 2 5 5 2Malathion (organophosphate) 2 2 1 4 1Carbaryl (carbamate) 2 1 1 4 1Diﬂubenzuron (chitin-synthesis inhibitor) 1 1 1 1 4Methoprene ( juvenile hormone analogue) 1 1 1 2 2Bacillus thuringiensis 111 1 1Table 15.1 The toxicity to nontarget
organisms, and the persistence, of selected
insecticides. Possible ratings range from a minimum of 1 (which may, therefore,include zero toxicity) to a maximum of 5.
Most damage is done by insecticides thatcombine persistence with acute toxicity tonontarget organisms. This clearly applies,to an extent, to each of the ﬁrst six (broad-spectrum) insecticides. (AfterMetcalf, 1982; Horn, 1988.)the pest bounces
back because itsenemies are killedEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 442ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 443
•• ••100
80
60
40
20
0Loopers (per 100 sweeps)
180
160140
120
100
80
60
4020Larvae (per 1600 sweeps)Jul 18 Jul 25 Aug 2 Aug 9 Aug 16 Aug 23 Aug 30
Jul 6 Jul 15 Jul 22 Jul 29 Aug 5 Aug 12(b)
(c) (d)
Control
Treatments with toxaphene-DDT
Two treatmentsBidrin used against Lygus
Spray dates: Jun 8, Jun 17,
Jun 28, Jun 14
Untreated
98Mortality90
50
10
2
0.01 0.1 1.0 10.019601966
1968
1969
Azodrin ( µg bug–1)30Bollworms
(per 300 sample units)40
3020
10
023
AugBollworm population
TreatmentControl Azodrin
6
    Sep13 20 27 5
Oct23
   Aug30 6
    Sep13 20 27 5
Oct
Predator populationPredators
(per 300 terminals)500
400300
200
100
0500
400300
200
100
06
    Sep23
  Aug21 28 6
Oct6
    Sep23
   Aug21 28 6
Oct
Damaged bollsDamaged bolls
(per 300 sample units)60
5040302010
0605040302010
03023
  Aug6
   Sep13 20 27 5
Oct23
   Aug30 6
     Sep13 20 27 5
Oct(a)
40
302010
0
Figure 15.2 Pesticide problems amongst cotton pests in the San Joaquin Valley, California. (a) Target pest resurgence: cotton bollworms
(Heliothis zea ) resurged because the abundance of their natural predators was reduced – the number of damaged bolls was higher. (b) An
increase in cabbage loopers ( Trichoplusia ni ) and (c) in beet army worms ( Spodoptera exigua ) were seen when plots were sprayed against the
target lygus bugs ( Lygus hesperus ) – both are examples of secondary pest outbreaks. (d) Increasing resistance of lygus bugs to Azodrin®.
(After van den Bosch et al. , 1971.)EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 443444 CHAPTER 15
15.2.2.4 Secondary pests
The after-effects of a pesticide may
involve even more subtle reactions.When a pesticide is applied, it may notbe only the target pest that resurges.Alongside the target are likely to be a
number of potential pest species that had
been kept in check by their natural enemies (see Figure 15.1c). Ifthe pesticide destroys these, the potential pests become real ones– and are called secondary pests. A dramatic example concernsthe insect pests of cotton in the southern part of the USA. In 1950,when mass dissemination of organic insecticides began, there were two primary pests: the Alabama leafworm and the boll weevil ( Anthonomus grandis ), an invader from Mexico (Smith,
1998). Organochlorine and organophosphate insecticides (see
Section 15.2.2.1) were applied fewer than ﬁve times a year andinitially had apparently miraculous results – cotton yields soared.By 1955, however, three secondary pests had emerged: the cotton bollworm, the cotton aphid and the false pink bollworm.The pesticide applications rose to 8–10 per year. This reduced the problem of the aphid and the false pink bollworm, but led to the emergence of ﬁve further secondary pests. By the 1960s,the original two pest species had become eight and there were,on average, an unsustainable 28 applications of insecticide per year. A study in the San Joaquin Valley, California, revealed tar-get pest resurgence (in this case cotton bollworm was the targetspecies; Figure 15.2a) and secondary pest outbreaks in action (cabbage loopers and beet army worms increased after insecti-
cide application against another target species, the lygus bug; Figure 15.2b, c). Improved performance in pest managementwill depend on a thorough understanding of the interactionsamongst pests and nonpests as well as detailed knowledge,through testing, of the action of potential pesticides against thevarious species.
Sometimes the unintended effects
of pesticide application have beenmuch less subtle than target pest orsecondary pest resurgence. The poten-tial for disaster is illustrated by the
occasion when massive doses of the insecticide dieldrin were appliedto large areas of Illinois farmland from 1954 to 1958 to ‘eradicate’a grassland pest, the Japanese beetle. Cattle and sheep on the farmswere poisoned, 90% of cats and a number of dogs were killed,and among the wildlife 12 species of mammals and 19 species ofbirds suffered losses (Luckman & Decker, 1960). Outcomes suchas this argue for a precautionary approach in any pest manage-ment exercise. Coupled with much improved knowledge aboutthe toxicity and persistence of pesticides, and the developmentof more speciﬁc and less persistent pesticides, such disastersshould never occur again.15.2.3 Herbicides, weeds and farmland birds
Herbicides are used in very large
amounts and on a worldwide scale.They are active against pest plants and when used at commercial ratesappear to have few signiﬁcant effects 
on animals. Herbicide pollution of theenvironment did not, until relatively recently, arouse the passionsassociated with insecticides. However, conservationists nowworry about the loss of ‘weeds’ that are the food hosts for larvaeof butterﬂies and other insects and whose seeds form the maindiet of many birds. A recent development has been the geneticmodiﬁcation of crops such as sugar beet to produce resistance tothe nonselective herbicide glyphosate (see Section 15.2.2.2). Thisallows the herbicide to be used to effectively control weeds that
normally compete with the crop without adverse affect on thesugar beet itself.
Fat hen ( Chenopodium album ), a plant that occurs worldwide,
is one weed that can be expected to be affected adversely by thefarming of genetically modiﬁed (GM) crops; but the seeds of fathen are an important winter food source for farmland birds,including the skylark ( Alauda arvensis ). Watkinson et al. (2000) took
advantage of the fact that the population ecologies of both fat henand skylarks have been intensively studied and incorporatedboth into a model of the impacts of GM sugar beet on farmlandpopulations. Skylarks forage preferentially in weedy ﬁelds and aggregate locally in response to weed seed abundance. Hence, theimpact of GM sugar beet on the birds will depend critically on
the extent to which high-density patches of weeds are affected.Watkinson et al. incorporated the possible effects of weed 
seed density on farming practice. Their model assumed: (i) thatbefore the introduction of GM technology, most farms have a relatively low density of weed seeds, with a few farms having veryhigh densities (solid line in Figure 15.3a); and (ii) the probabilityof a farmer adopting GM crops is related to seed bank densitythrough a parameter ρ. Positive values of ρmean that farmers
are more likely to adopt the technology where seed densities arecurrently high and there is the potential to reduce yield losses to weeds. This leads to an increase in the relative abundance oflow-density ﬁelds (dotted line in Figure 15.3a). Negative valuesof ρindicate that farmers are more likely to adopt the techno-
logy where seed densities are currently low (intensively managedfarms), perhaps because a history of effective weed control is correlated with a willingness to adopt new technology. This leadsto a decreased frequency of low-density ﬁelds (dashed line in Figure 15.3a). Note that ρis not an ecological parameter. Rather
it reﬂects a socioeconomic response to the introduction of newtechnology. The way that farmers will respond is not self-evidentand needs to be included as a variable in the model. It turns outthat the relationship between current weed levels and uptake of the new technology ( ρ) is as important to bird population 
•• ••nonpests become
pests when theirenemies andcompetitors arekilled
mortality ofnontarget species in generalunintended effects of the geneticmodiﬁcation of cropswith herbicideresistanceEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 444ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 445
density as the direct impact of the technology on weed abundance
(Figure 15.3b), emphasizing the need for resource managers tothink in terms of the triple bottomline of sustainability, with itsecological, social and economic dimensions.
15.2.4 Evolution of resistance to pesticides
Chemical pesticides lose their role in sus-tainable agriculture if the pests evolveresistance. The evolution of pesticide
resistance is simply natural selection in action. It is almost cer-tain to occur when vast numbers of individuals in a genetically
variable population are killed in a systematic way by the pesticide.One or a few individuals may be unusually resistant (perhapsbecause they possess an enzyme that can detoxify the pesticide).If the pesticide is applied repeatedly, each successive generation
of the pest will contain a larger proportion of resistant indi-viduals. Pests typically have a high intrinsic rate of reproduction,and so a few individuals in one generation may give rise to hundreds or thousands in the next, and resistance spreads veryrapidly in a population.
This problem was often ignored in the past, even though 
the ﬁrst case of DDT resistance was reported as early as 1946 
•• ••0.010
0.008
0Frequency
Weed seed density (m–2) following control200 400 8000.0060.0040.002
600Higher uptake where weed densities are high
Higher uptake where weed densities are low(a)
–2
2Relative skylark density
0
1–1
log ρ
00.20.40.60.81
Γ00.40.60.81(b)Figure 15.3 (a) Frequency distributions of
mean seed densities across farms before the
introduction of GM sugar beet (solid line),and in two situations where the technologyhas been adopted: where the technology 
is preferentially adopted on farms whereweed density is currently high (dotted line)and where it is currently low (dashed line).(b) The relative density of skylarks in ﬁeldsin winter (vertical axis; unity indicates ﬁelduse before the introduction of GM crops)in relation to ρ(horizontal axis; positive
values mean farmers are more likely toadopt GM technology where seed densities
are currently high, negative values whereseed densities are currently low) and to theapproximate reduction in weed seed bankdensity due to the introduction of GMcrops ( Γ, third axis; realistic values are
those less than 0.1). Note that theparameter space that real systems areexpected to occupy is the ‘slice’ of thediagram nearest to you, where smallpositive or negative values of ρgive 
quite different skylark densities. (AfterWatkinson et al. , 2000.)
evolved resistance: a
widespread problemEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 445446 CHAPTER 15
(in house-ﬂies, Musca domestica , in Sweden). The scale of the 
problem is illustrated in Figure 15.4, which shows the exponen-
tial increases in the number of invertebrates, weeds and plant pathogens resistant to insecticides. The cotton pest studydescribed earlier also provides evidence of the evolution of resist-
ance to a pesticide (see Figure 15.2d). Even rodents and rabbits(Oryctolagus cuniculus ) have evolved resistance to certain pesticides
(Twigg et al. , 2002).
The evolution of pesticide resistance
can be slowed, though, by changingfrom one pesticide to another, in a
repeated sequence that is rapid enough that resistance does nothave time to emerge (Roush & McKenzie, 1987). River blindness,a devastating disease that has now been effectively eradicated 
over large areas of Africa, is transmitted by the biting blackﬂySimulium damnosum , whose larvae live in rivers. A massive 
helicopter pesticide spraying effort in several African countries(50,000 km of river were being treated weekly by 1999; Yameogoet al. , 2001) began with Temephos, but resistance appeared
within 5 years (Table 15.2). Temephos was then replaced by anotherorganophosphate, Chlorphoxim, but resistance rapidly evolved tothis too. The strategy of using a range of pesticides on a rotationalbasis has prevented further evolution of resistance and by 1994there were few populations that were still resistant to Temephos(Davies, 1994).
If chemical pesticides brought nothing but problems, however
– if their use was intrinsically and acutely unsustainable – then
they would already have fallen out of widespread use. This hasnot happened. Instead, their rate of production has increased rapidly.The ratio of cost to beneﬁt for the individual producer has generally remained in favor of pesticide use. Moreover, in manypoorer countries, the prospect of imminent mass starvation, orof an epidemic disease, are so frightening that the social and health
costs of using pesticides have to be ignored. In general the useof pesticides is justiﬁed by objective measures such as ‘livessaved’, ‘economic efﬁciency of food production’ and ‘total foodproduced’. In these very fundamental senses, their use may bedescribed as sustainable. In practice, sustainability depends on con-tinually developing new pesticides that keep at least one step aheadof the pests: pesticides that are less persistent, biodegradable andmore accurately targeted at the pests.
15.2.5 Biological control
Outbreaks of pests occur repeatedly and so does the need to apply
pesticides. But biologists can sometimes replace chemicals by
•• ••500Number of pesticide-resistant species400
300200100
1930 1940 1960 1970
1950 1980 1990
Year0Insects and mites
Plant pathogensWeeds
Figure 15.4 The increase in the number
of arthropod (insects and mites), plant
pathogens and weed species reported to be resistant to at least one pesticide. (AfterGould, 1991.)
managing resistanceTable 15.2 History of pesticide use against the aquatic larvae 
of blackﬂies, the vectors of river blindness in Africa. After earlyconcentration on Temephos and Chlorphoxim, to which theinsects became resistant, pesticides were used on a rotational basisto prevent the evolution of resistance. (After Davies, 1994.)
Name of pesticide Class of chemical History of use
Temephos Organophosphate 1975 to present
Chlorphoxim Organophosphate 1980–90Bacillus thuringiensis H14 Biological insecticide 1980 to present
Permethrin Pyrethroid 1985 to presentCarbosulfan Carbamate 1985 to presentPyraclofos Organic phosphate 1991 to presentPhoxim Organophosphate 1991 to presentEtofenprox Pyrethroid 1994 to presentEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 446ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 447
another tool that does the same job
and often costs a great deal less – biological control (the manipulation of the natural enemies of pests). Biologicalcontrol involves the application of the-
ory about interactions between species
and their natural enemies (see Chapters 10, 12 and 14) to limitthe population density of speciﬁc pest species. There are a vari-ety of categories of biological control.
The ﬁrst is the introduction of a natural enemy from another
geographic area – very often the area in which the pest originatedprior to achieving pest status – in order that the control agentshould persist and thus maintain the pest, long term, below itseconomic threshold. This is a case of a desired invasion of an exotic
species and is often called classical biological control or importation .
By contrast, conservation biological control involves manipula-
tions that augment the density or persistence of populations ofgeneralist natural enemies that are native to the pest’s new area(Barbosa, 1998).
Inoculation is similar to introduction, but requires the periodic
release of a control agent where it is unable to persist through-out the year, with the aim of providing control for only one or perhaps a few generations. A variation on the theme of inoculation is ‘augmentation’, which involves the release of anindigenous natural enemy in order to supplement an existing population, and is also therefore carried out repeatedly, typicallyto intercept a period of rapid pest population growth.
Finally, inundation is the release of large numbers of a 
natural enemy, with the aim of killing those pests present at the
time, but with no expectation of providing long-term control asa result of the control agent’s population increasing or maintainingitself. By analogy with the use of chemicals, agents used in thisway are referred to as biological pesticides.
Insects have been the main agents of biological control
against both insect pests (where parasitoids have been particularlyuseful) and weeds. Table 15.3 summarizes the extent to whichthey have been used and the proportion of cases where theestablishment of an agent has greatly reduced or eliminated theneed for other control measures (Waage & Greathead, 1988).Probably the best example of 
‘classical’ biological control is itself a 
classic. Its success marked the start ofbiological control in a modern sense.The cottony cushion scale insect,
Icerya purchasi , was ﬁrst discovered as a pest of Californian citrus
orchards in 1868. By 1886 it had brought the citrus industry closeto the point of destruction. Ecologists initiated a worldwide correspondence to try and discover the natural home and naturalenemies of the scale, eventually leading to the importation toCalifornia of about 12,000 Cryptochaetum (a dipteran parasitoid)
from Australia and 500 predatory ladybird beetles ( Rodolia cardi-
nalis ) from Australia and New Zealand. Initially, the parasitoids
seemed simply to have disappeared, but the predatory beetles
underwent such a population explosion that all infestations of thescale insects in California were controlled by the end of 1890.Although the beetles have usually taken most or all of the credit,the long-term outcome has been that the beetles are instrumentalin keeping the scale in check inland, but Cryptochaetum is the main
agent of control on the coast (Flint & van den Bosch, 1981).
This example illustrates a number of
important general points. Species maybecome pests simply because, by colo-nization of a new area, they escape thecontrol of their natural enemies (the enemy release hypothesis)(Keane & Crawley, 2002). Biological control by importation is thus,in an important sense, restoration of the status quo for the
speciﬁc predator–prey interaction (although the overall ecolo-gical context is certain to differ from what would have been thecase where the pest and control agent originated). Biologicalcontrol requires the classical skills of the taxonomist to ﬁnd thepest in its native habitat, and particularly to identify and isolateits natural enemies. This may often be a difﬁcult task – especiallyif the natural enemy has the desired effect of keeping the targetspecies at a low carrying capacity, since both the target and theagent will then be rare in their natural habitat. Nevertheless, therate of return on investment can be highly favorable. In the caseof the cottony cushion scale, biological control has subsequentlybeen transferred to 50 other countries and savings have beenimmense. In addition, this example illustrates the importance of establishing several, hopefully complementary, enemies tocontrol a pest. Finally, classical biological control, like natural con-trol, can be destabilized by chemicals. The ﬁrst use of DDT inCalifornian citrus orchards in 1946–47 against the citricola scaleCoccus pseudomagnoliarum led to an outbreak of the (by then) rarely
seen cottony cushion scale when the DDT almost eliminated theladybirds. The use of DDT was terminated.
Many pests have a diversity of 
natural enemies that already occur intheir vicinity. For example, the aphidpests of wheat (e.g. Sitobion avenae or
Rhopalasiphum spp.) are attacked by
•• ••Table 15.3 The record of insects as biological control agents
against insect pests and weeds. (After Waage & Greathead, 1988.)
Insect pests Weeds
Control agent species 563 126
Pest species 292 70Countries 168 55Cases where agent has become established 1063 367Substantial successes 421 113Successes as a percentage of establishments 40 31. . . illustrating
several general points
conservationbiological control of wheat aphidsbiological control:the use of naturalenemies in a varietyof wayscottony cushion scaleinsect: a classic caseof importation . . .EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 447••448 CHAPTER 15
coccinellid and other beetles, heteropteran bugs, lacewings
(Chrysopidae), syrphid ﬂy larvae and spiders – all part of a largegroup of specialist aphid predators and generalists that include them in their diet (Brewer & Elliott, 2004). Many of these naturalenemies overwinter in the grassy boundaries at the edge of wheat
ﬁelds, from where they disperse and reduce aphid populationsaround the ﬁeld edges. The planting of grassy strips within theﬁelds can enhance these natural populations and the scale of theirimpact on aphid pests. This is an example of ‘conservation bio-logical control’ in action (Barbosa, 1998).
‘Inoculation’ as a means of bio-
logical control is widely practised inthe control of arthropod pests inglasshouses, a situation in which crops
are removed, along with the pests and their natural enemies, at
the end of the growing season (van Lenteren & Woets, 1988).Two particularly important species of natural enemy used in thisway are Phytoseiulus persimilis , a mite that preys on the spider mite
Tetranychus urticae , a pest of cucumbers and other vegetables, 
and Encarsia formosa , a chalcid parasitoid wasp of the whiteﬂy
Trialeurodes vaporariorum , a pest in particular of tomatoes and
cucumbers. By 1985 in Western Europe, around 500 million individuals of each species were being produced each year.
‘Inundation’ often involves the use
of insect pathogens to control insectpests (Payne, 1988). By far the mostwidespread and important agent is the
bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis , which
can easily be produced on artiﬁcial media. After being ingestedby insect larvae, gut juices release powerful toxins and death occurs30 min to 3 days later. Signiﬁcantly, there is a range of varieties(or ‘pathotypes’) of B. thuringiensis , including one speciﬁc against
lepidoptera (many agricultural pests), another against diptera,especially mosquitos and blackﬂies (the vectors of malaria andonchocerciasis) and a third against beetles (many agriculturaland stored product pests). B. thuringiensis is used inundatively as
a microbial insecticide. Its advantages are its powerful toxicityagainst target insects and its lack of toxicity against organisms outside this narrow group (including ourselves and most of thepest’s natural enemies). Plants, including cotton ( Gossypium hir-
sutum ), have been genetically modiﬁed to express the B.
thuringiensis toxin (insecticidal crystal protein Cry1Ac). The sur-
vivorship of pink bollworm larvae ( Pectinaphora gossypiella ) on genet-
ically modiﬁed cotton was 46–100% lower than on nonmodiﬁedcotton (Lui et al. , 2001). Concern has arisen about the widespread
insertion of Bt into commercial genetically modiﬁed crops,
because of the increased likelihood ofthe development of resistance to one ofthe most effective ‘natural’ insecticidesavailable.
Biological control may appear to be
a particularly environmentally friendlyapproach to pest control, but examples are coming to light
where even carefully chosen and apparently successful introduc-tions of biological control agents have impacted on nontargetspecies. For example, a seed-feeding weevil ( Rhinocyllus conicus ),
introduced to North America to control exotic Carduus thistles,
attacks more than 30% of native thistles (of which there are more
than 90 species), reducing thistle densities (by 90% in the case of the Platte thistle Cirsuim canescens ) with consequent adverse
impacts on the populations of a native picture-winged ﬂy(Paracantha culta ) that feeds on thistle seeds (Louda et al. , 2003a).
Louda et al. (2003b) reviewed 10 biological control projects that
included the unusual but worthwhile step of monitoring nontar-get effects and concluded that relatives of the target species weremost likely to be attacked whilst rare native species were par-
ticularly susceptible. Their recommendations for managementincluded the avoidance of generalist control agents, an expansionof host-speciﬁcity testing and the need to incorporate more eco-logical information when evaluating potential biological controlagents.
15.2.6 Integrated pest management
A variety of management implications
of our understanding of pest populationdynamics have been presented in pre-vious sections. However, it is importantto take a broader perspective and con-
sider how all the different tools at the pest controller’s disposalcan be deployed most effectively, both to maximize the economicbeneﬁt of reducing pest density and to minimize the adverse envir-onmental and health consequences. This is what integrated pestmanagement (IPM) is intended to achieve. It combines physicalcontrol (for example, simply keeping invaders from arriving,keeping pests away from crops, or picking them off by hand whenthey arrive), cultural control (for example, rotating the crops plantedin a ﬁeld so pests cannot build up their numbers over several years),
biological and chemical control, and the use of resistant varietiesof crop. IPM came of age as part of the reaction against the un-thinking use of chemical pesticides in the 1940s and 1950s.
IPM is ecologically based and relies heavily on natural mor-
tality factors, such as weather and enemies, and seeks to disruptthe latter as little as possible. It aims to control pests below theEIL, and it depends on monitoring the abundance of pests andtheir natural enemies and using various control methods as com-plementary parts of an overall program. Broad-spectrum pesticidesin particular, although not excluded, are used only very sparingly,and if chemicals are used at all it is in ways that minimize thecosts and quantities used. The essence of the IPM approach is to make the control measures ﬁt the pest problem, and no two
problems are the same – even in adjacent ﬁelds. Thus, IPM ofteninvolves the development of computer-based expert systems
••inoculation against
glasshouse pests
microbial control of insects viainundationIPM: an ecologicallyrather thanchemically basedphilosophy
biological control is not alwaysenvironmentallyfriendlyEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 448••ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 449
that can be used by farmers to diagnose pest problems and sug-
gest appropriate responses (Mahaman et al. , 2003).
The caterpillar of the potato tuber
moth ( Phthorimaea operculella ) com-
monly damages crops in New Zealand.
An invader from a warm temperate
subtropical country, it is most devastating when conditions arewarm and dry (i.e. when the environment coincides closely withits optimal niche requirements – see Chapter 3). There can be asmany as 6–8 generations per year and different generations mineleaves, stems and tubers. The caterpillars are protected bothfrom natural enemies (parasitoids) and insecticides when in thetuber, so control must be applied to the leaf-mining generations.The IPM strategy for potato tuber moth (Herman, 2000) involves:
(i) monitoring (female pheromone traps, set weekly from mid sum-mer, are used to attract males, which are counted); (ii) culturalmethods (the soil is cultivated to prevent soil cracking, soil ridgesare molded up more than once and soil moisture is maintained);and (iii) the use of insecticides, but only when absolutely neces-sary (most commonly the organophosphate, methamidophos).Farmers follow the decision tree shown in Figure 15.5.
Implicit in the philosophy of IPM 
is the idea that pest control cannot be isolated from other aspects of foodproduction and it is especially bound upwith the means by which soil fertility
is maintained and improved. These broader sustainable agricul-
tural systems, including IFS (integrated farming systems) in theUSA and LIFE (lower input farming and environment) in Europe(International Organisation for Biological Control, 1989; NationalResearch Council, 1990), have advantages in terms of reduced envir-onmental hazards. Even so, it is unreasonable to suppose that theywill be adopted widely unless they are also sound in economicterms. In this context, Figure 15.6 shows the yields of apples from organic, conventional and integrated production systems in Washington State from 1994 to 1999 (Reganold et al. , 2001).
••integration of IPM in
sustainable farmingsystemsS
P
R
A
Y
Possible to
use cultural
controls?If not possibleMolds? Breaking openPTM
population?IncreasingPrevailing
weather?Cool/wetTime of
year?Pre FebruaryGrowth stage
of crop?Pre tuber
D
O
 
N
O
T
 
S
P
R
A
Y
Figure 15.5 Decision ﬂow chart for the integrated pest
management of potato tuber moths (PTM) in New Zealand.
Boxed phrases are questions (e.g. ‘what is the growth stage of the crop?’), the words in the arrows are the farmer’s answers to the questions (e.g. ‘before the tuber has formed’) and the
recommended action is shown in the vertical box (‘don’t spray the crop’). Note that February is late summer in New Zealand.(After Herman, 2000.) Photograph © International Potato Center (CIP).IPM for the potato
tuber moth
1995Yield (tons ha–1)
1996 1997 1998 1999 Cumulative
(1995–9)300
250
200
150
100
50
0
YearOrganic
Conventional
Integrated
Figure 15.6 The fruit yields of three
apple production systems. (From 
Reganold et al. , 2001.)EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 449450 CHAPTER 15
Organic management excludes such conventional inputs as 
synthetic pesticides and fertilizers whilst integrated farming usesreduced amounts of chemicals by integrating organic and con-ventional approaches. All three systems gave similar apple yieldsbut the organic and integrated systems had higher soil quality 
and potentially lower environmental impacts. When comparedwith conventional and integrated systems, the organic system produced sweeter apples, higher proﬁtability and greater energyefﬁciency. Note, however, that despite some widely held beliefs,organic farming is not totally free of adverse environmental consequences. For example, some approved pesticides are just as harmful as synthetic ones whilst the application of animal manure may lead to undesirable levels of nitrate runoff tostreams just as synthetic fertilizers can (Trewavas, 2001). There
is a need for research to compare the types and magnitudes of environmental consequences of the various approaches toagricultural management.
15.2.7 The importance of the early control of invaders
Many pests begin life as exotic invaders.
The best way to deal with the problemof potential invaders is to understand
their immigration potential (see Section 7.4.2) and prevent theirarrival by careful biosecurity processes at a nation’s point of
entry, or elsewhere on trade routes (Wittenberg & Cock, 2001).However, there are so many potential invaders that it is unrealisticto expect that they all will be prevented from arriving. Moreover,many arrivals will not establish, and many of those that do establishwill do so without dramatic ecological consequences. Managersneed to focus on the really problematic cases. Thus, the next stepin an invader management strategy is to prioritize those that mightarrive (or that have recently arrived) according to their likelihoodof persisting, establishing large populations, spreading through the
new area and causing signiﬁcant problems. This is not an easymatter, but particular life history traits provide useful pointers (dealtwith in Section 7.3.2). We will see in Chapter 22 that assessmentof the potential to do harm at higher ecological levels (com-munity/ecosystem) can also be helpful in prioritizing invaders for special attention (see Section 22.3.1).
The arrival of an exotic species
with a high likelihood of becoming asigniﬁcant invasive species should be a matter for urgent action, because
this is the stage at which eradication is both feasible and easy to justify economically. Such campaigns sometimes rely on fundamental knowledge of population ecology. An example is 
the eradication of the South African sabellid polychaete worm, Terebrasabella heterouncinata , a parasite of abalone and other 
gastropods that became established near the outﬂow of anabalone aquaculture facility in California (Culver & Kuris, 2000).Its population biology was understood sufﬁciently to know it 
was speciﬁc to gastropods, that two species of Tegula were its 
principal hosts in the area, and that large snails were most susceptible to the parasite. Volunteers removed 1.6 million largehosts, thereby reducing the density of susceptible hosts below that needed for parasite transmission (see Chapter 12), whichbecame extinct.
However, in the words of Simberloff (2003), rapid responses
to recent invaders will often ‘resemble a blunderbuss attack
rather than a surgical strike’. He notes, for example, that a stringof successful eradications of small populations of weeds such aspampas grass ( Cortaderia selloana ) and ragwort ( Senecio jacobaea )
on New Zealand’s offshore islands (Timmins & Braithwaite, 2002)were effective because of early action using brute-force methods.Similarly, the white-spotted tussock moth ( Orygyia thyellina ), 
discovered in a suburban region of Auckland, New Zealand, waseradicated (at a cost of US$5 million) using Bacillus thuringiensis
spray (Clearwater, 2001). The only population biological informa-
tion to hand was that females attracted males by pheromone,knowledge that was used to trap males and determine areas thatneeded respraying. Eradication of a recently established speciesknown to be invasive elsewhere usually cannot and should notwait for new population studies to be performed.
Once invaders have established and spread through a new area
and are determined to be pests, they are just another species atwhich the pest manager’s armory must be directed.
15.3 Harvest management
Harvesting of populations by people isclearly in the realm of predator–preyinteractions and harvest managementrelies on the theory of predator–preydynamics (see Chapters 10 and 14). When a natural population
is exploited by culling or harvesting – whether this involves theremoval of whales or ﬁsh from the sea, the capture of ‘bushmeat’in the African savanna or the removal of timber from a forest –it is much easier to say what we want to avoid than precisely whatwe might wish to achieve. On the one hand, we want to avoidoverexploitation, where too many individuals are removed andthe population is driven into biological jeopardy, or economicinsigniﬁcance or perhaps even to extinction. But harvest managersalso want to avoid underexploitation, where far fewer individuals
are removed than the population can bear, and a crop of food, forexample, is produced which is smaller than necessary, threaten-ing both the health of potential consumers and the livelihood of all those employed in the harvesting operation. However, aswe shall see, the best position to occupy between these twoextremes is not easy to determine, since it needs to combine considerations that are not only biological (the well-being of the exploited population) and economic (the proﬁts being made
•• ••. . . early control 
is bestharvesting aims toavoid over- and
underexploitationwhen a new pestinvades . . .EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 450ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 451
from the operation), but also social (local levels of employ-
ment and the maintenance of traditional lifestyles and human communities) (Hilborn & Walters, 1992; Milner-Gulland &Mace, 1998). We begin, though, with the biology.
15.3.1 Maximum sustainable yield
The ﬁrst point to grasp about harvesting theory is that high yieldsare obtained from populations held
below, often well below, the carrying capacity. This fundamen-tal pattern is captured by the model population in Figure 15.7.
There, the natural net recruitment (or net productivity) of the population is described by an n-shaped curve (see Section 5.4.2).Recruitment rate is low when there are few individuals and lowwhen there is intense intraspeciﬁc competition. It is zero at thecarrying capacity ( K). The density giving the highest net recruit-
ment rate depends on the exact form of intraspeciﬁc competition.This density is K/2 in the logistic equation (see Section 5.9) but,
for example, is only slightly less than Kin many large mammals
(see Figure 5.10d). Always, though, the rate of net recruitment is
highest at an ‘intermediate’ density, less than K.
Figure 15.7 also illustrates three possible harvesting ‘strategies’,
although in each case there is a ﬁxed harvesting rate, i.e. a ﬁxed
number of individuals removed during a given period of time, or ‘ﬁxed quota ’. When the harvesting and recruitment lines cross,
the harvesting and recruitment rates are equal and opposite; the number removed per unit time by the harvester equals thenumber recruited per unit time by the population. Of particularinterest is the harvesting rate h
m, the line that crosses (or, in fact,
just touches) the recruitment rate curve at its peak. This is the highest harvesting rate that the population can match with
its own recruitment. It is known as the maximum sustainable yield(MSY), and as the name implies, it is the largest harvest that can be removed from the population on a regular and repeated(indeed indeﬁnite) basis. It is equal to the maximum rate of
recruitment, and it is obtained from the population by depress-ing it to the density at which the recruitment rate curve peaks.
The MSY concept is central to
much of the theory and practice ofharvesting. This makes the recognitionof the following shortcomings in theconcept all the more essential.
1By treating the population as a number of similar individuals,
or as an undifferentiated biomass, it ignores all aspects of population structure such as size or age classes and their differential rates of growth, survival and reproduction. The alternatives that incorporate structure are considered below.
2By being based on a single recruitment curve it treats the 
environment as unvarying.
3In practice, it may be impossible to obtain a reliable estimateof the MSY.
4Achieving an MSY is by no means the only, nor necessarilythe best, criterion by which success in the management of aharvesting operation should be judged (see, for example,Section 15.3.9).
Despite all these difﬁculties, the
MSY concept dominated resource man-
agement for many years in ﬁsheries,forestry and wildlife exploitation. Prior to 1980, for example, therewere 39 agencies for the management of marine ﬁsheries, every
•• ••Nmhh
Nhh
hm hm
hl hl
KRecruitment rate
Harvesting rateFigure 15.7 Fixed quota harvesting. The
ﬁgure shows a single recruitment curve 
and three ﬁxed quota harvesting curves:high quota ( h
h), medium quota ( hm) and
low quota ( hl). Arrows in the ﬁgure refer 
to changes to be expected in abundanceunder the inﬂuence of the harvesting rate to which the arrows are closest. 
/H17033, equilibria. At hhthe only ‘equilibrium’ 
is when the population is driven toextinction. At h
lthere is a stable
equilibrium at a relatively high density, and also an unstable breakpoint at arelatively low density. The MSY is obtained at h
mbecause it just touches the
peak of the recruitment curve (at a densityN
m): populations greater than Nmare
reduced to Nm, but populations smaller
than Nmare driven to extinction.
MSY: the peak of the
net recruitment curveMSY has severeshortcomings . . .
. . . but has beenfrequently usedEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 451452 CHAPTER 15
one of which was required by its establishing convention to
manage on the basis of an MSY objective (Clark, 1981). In manyother areas, the MSY concept is still the guiding principle. More-over, by assuming that MSYs are both desirable and attainable,a number of the basic principles of harvesting can be explained.
Therefore, we begin here by exploring what can be learnt fromanalyses based on the MSY, but then look more deeply at man-agement strategies for exploited populations by examining the various shortcomings of MSY in more detail.
15.3.2 Simple MSY models of harvesting: ﬁxed quotas
The MSY density ( Nm) is an equilibrium
(gains =losses), but when harvesting is
based on the removal of a ﬁxed quota,
as it is in Figure 15.7, Nmis a very 
fragile equilibrium. If the density exceeds the MSY density, thenh
mexceeds the recruitment rate and the population declines
towards Nm. This, in itself, is satisfactory. But if, by chance, the
density is even slightly less than Nm, then hmwill once again exceed
the recruitment rate. Density will then decline even further, andif a ﬁxed quota at the MSY level is maintained, the populationwill decline until it is extinct. Furthermore, if the MSY is evenslightly overestimated, the harvesting rate will always exceed the
recruitment rate ( h
hin Figure 15.7). Extinction will then follow,
whatever the initial density. In short, a ﬁxed quota at the MSY
level might be desirable and reasonable in a wholly predictableworld about which we had perfect knowledge. But in the real worldof ﬂuctuating environments and imperfect data sets, these ﬁxed
quotas are open invitations to disaster.
Nevertheless, a ﬁxed-quota strategy
has frequently been used. On a speci-ﬁed day in the year, the ﬁshery (orhunting season) is opened and thecumulative catch logged. Then, whenthe quota (estimated MSY) has been
taken, the ﬁshery is closed for the rest of the year. An exampleof the use of ﬁxed quotas is provided by the Peruvian anchovy
(Engraulis ringens ) ﬁshery (Figure 15.8). From 1960 to 1972 this
was the world’s largest single ﬁshery, and it constituted a major sector of the Peruvian economy. Fisheries experts advisedthat the MSY was around 10 million tonnes annually, andcatches were limited accordingly. But the ﬁshing capacity of theﬂeet expanded, and in 1972 the catch crashed. Overﬁshing seemsat least to have been a major cause of the collapse, although its effects were compounded with the inﬂuences of profound climatic ﬂuctuations. A moratorium on ﬁshing would have been an ecologically sensible step, but this was not politically feasible: 20,000 people were dependent on the anchovy industryfor employment. The stock took more than 20 years to recover(Figure 15.8).15.3.3 A safer alternative: ﬁxed harvesting effort
The risk associated with ﬁxed quotas can be reduced if instead
there is regulation of the harvesting effort. The yield from a harvest ( H) can be thought of, simply, as being dependent on 
three things:
H=qEN. (15.1)
Yield, H, increases with the size of the
harvested population, N; it increases
with the level of harvesting effort, E
(e.g. the number of ‘trawler-days’ in a
ﬁshery or the number of ‘gun-days’with a hunted population); and it increases with harvesting
efﬁciency, q. On the assumption that this efﬁciency remains 
constant, Figure 15.9a depicts an exploited population subjectedto three potential harvesting strategies differing in harvestingeffort. Figure 15.9b then illustrates the overall relationship to beexpected, in a simple case like this, between effort and averageyield: there is an apparently ‘optimum’ effort giving rise to theMSY, E
m, with efforts both greater and less than this giving rise
to smaller yields.
Adopting Emis a much safer strategy than ﬁxing an MSY
quota. Now, in contrast to Figure 15.7, if density drops below Nm
(Figure 15.9a), recruitment exceeds the harvesting rate and the
population recovers. In fact, there needs to be a considerable over-estimate of E
mbefore the population is driven to extinction ( E0
in Figure 15.9a). However, because there is a ﬁxed effort, the yieldvaries with population size. In particular, the yield will be less thanthe MSY whenever the population size, as a result of natural ﬂuc-tuations, drops below N
m. The appropriate reaction would be to
reduce effort slightly or at least hold it steady whilst the popula-tion recovers. But an understandable (albeit misguided) reaction
•• ••Landings (million tonnes)15
10
5
0
Year2000 1995 1990 1985 1980 1975 1970 1965 1960 1955 1950
Figure 15.8 Landings of the Peruvian anchovy since 1950. (After
Jennings et al. , 2001; data from FAO, 1995, 1998.)ﬁxed-quota
harvesting isextremely risky . . .
. . . whose dangersare illustrated by thePeruvian anchovyﬁsheryregulating harvestingeffort is less risky –but leads to a morevariable catchEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 452ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 453
might be to compensate by increasing the effort. This, however,
might depress population size further ( Ehin Figure 15.9a); and 
it is therefore easy to imagine the population being driven to extinction as very gradual increases in effort chase an ever-diminishing yield.
There are many examples of harvests being managed by 
legislative regulation of effort, and this occurs in spite of the fact
that effort usually deﬁes precise measurement and control. Forinstance, issuing a number of gun licenses leaves the accuracy ofthe hunters uncontrolled; and regulating the size and composi-tion of a ﬁshing ﬂeet leaves the weather to chance. Nevertheless,the harvesting of mule deer, pronghorn antelope and elks inColorado was controlled by issuing a limited but varying num-ber of hunting permits (Pojar, 1981). In the management of theimportant Paciﬁc halibut stock, effort was limited by seasonal 
closures and sanctuary zones – although a heavy investment inﬁshery protection vessels was needed to make this work (Pitcher& Hart, 1982).
15.3.4 Other MSY approaches: harvesting a ﬁxed
proportion or allowing constant escapement
Two further management strategies
are based on the simple idea of avail-ability of a surplus yield. First, a constantproportion of the population can beharvested (this is equivalent to ﬁxing 
a hunting mortality rate and shouldhave the same effect as harvesting at constant effort) (Milner-
Gulland & Mace, 1998). Thus, in the Northwest Territories ofCanada, 3–5% of the caribou and muskox populations can be killedeach year (Gunn, 1998), a strategy that involves the expense ofpreharvest censuses so that numbers to be harvested can be calculated.
Another strategy leaves a ﬁxed
number of breeding individuals at theend of each hunting season (constantescapement), an approach that involvesthe even greater expense of continuous
monitoring through the hunting season. Constant escapement is a particularly safe option because it rules out the accidentalremoval of all the breeding individuals before breeding hasoccurred. Constant escapement is particularly useful for annualspecies because they lack the buffer provided by immature individuals in longer lived species (Milner-Gulland & Mace,1998). The Falkland Islands government uses a constant escapement strategy for the annual Loligo squid. Stock sizes are
assessed weekly from mid-season onwards and the ﬁshery is
closed when the ratio of stocks in the presence and absence of ﬁshing falls to 0.3–0.4. After 10 years of this management regime the squid ﬁshery shows good signs of sustainability(Figure 15.10).
Stephens et al. (2002) used simulation
models to compare the outcomes for apopulation of alpine marmots ( Marmota
marmota ) of ﬁxed-quota, ﬁxed-effort and
threshold harvesting. In the latter case,
•• ••
Recruitment rate or harvesting rate
NE0 Eh
Em(a) (b)Average yieldMSY
EffortEmRecruitment rate Harvesting rate
hm
Nm Nh
Figure 15.9 Fixed effort harvesting. (a) Curves, arrows and dots are as in Figure 15.7. The maximum sustainable yield (MSY) is obtained
with an effort of Em, leading to a stable equilibrium at a density of Nmwith a yield of hm. At a somewhat higher effort ( Eh), the equilibrium
density and the yield are both lower than with Embut the equilibrium is still stable. Only at a much higher effort ( E0) is the population
driven to extinction. (b) The overall relationship between the level of the ﬁxed effort and average yield.
other MSY
approaches: . . .. . . harvesting a constant proportion . . ....o r  l e a v i n g  a constant‘escapement’ ofbreeding individuals
constant escapementseems to work bestfor alpine marmothuntingEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 453454 CHAPTER 15
harvesting only occurred during years in which the population
exceeded a given threshold and exploitation continued until that threshold was reached (essentially a constant escapementapproach). These social mammals are hunted in parts of Europebut the modeling was performed using extensive data available
from a nonhunted population. They found that threshold harvest-ing provided the highest mean yields coupled with an acceptablylow extinction risk. However, the introduction of error, associ-ated with less frequent censuses (3-yearly rather than yearly), ledto higher variance in yields and a much increased extinctionprobability (Stephens et al. , 2002). This emphasizes the import-
ance of frequent censuses for constant escapement strategies tosucceed.15.3.5 Instability of harvested populations: 
multiple equilibria
Even with regulation of effort, harvest-
ing near the MSY level may be court-ing disaster. The recruitment rate maybe particularly low in the smallest populations (a pattern knownas depensation ; Figure 15.11a); for instance, the recruitment of young
salmon is low at low densities because of intense predation from
larger ﬁsh, and the recruitment of young whales may be low atlow densities simply because of the reduced chances of males andfemales meeting to mate. However, depensation is apparently quiterare; Myers et al. (1995) detected it in only three of 128 ﬁsh stock
•• ••Monthly total catch (tonnes)35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5000
0
Year1995 1993 1991 1989 1987 1985 1983Figure 15.10 Monthly Loligo squid
catches by licensed vessels in the Falkland
Islands where a constant escapementmanagement strategy is used. Note thatthere are two ﬁshing seasons each year
(February–May and August–October). Thedotted lines (1984–86) represent estimatedrather than actual catches. (After des Clers, 1998.)Rate of recruitment or harvesting
NUUSS
Nu(a)
Recruitment rate Harvesting rateE0 E0Em
Em
N(b)
Figure 15.11 Multiple equilibria in
harvesting. (a) When recruitment rate 
is particularly low at low densities, theharvesting effort giving the MSY ( E
m) has
not only a stable equilibrium ( S) but also
an unstable breakpoint ( U) at a density
below which the population declines toextinction. The population can also be
driven to extinction by harvesting efforts(E
0) not much greater than Em. (b) When
harvesting efﬁciency declines at high
densities, comments similar to those in (a) are appropriate.
the problem of
‘depensation’EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 454ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 455
data sets with 15 or more years available for analysis. Alternat-
ively, harvesting efﬁciency may increase in small populations(Figure 15.11b). For instance, many clupeids (sardines, anchovies,herring) are especially prone to capture at low densities, becausethey form a small number of large schools that follow stereotyped
migratory paths that the trawlers can intercept. With eitherdepensation or higher harvesting efﬁciency at low density, smalloverestimates of E
mare liable to lead to overexploitation or even
eventual extinction.
Even more important, however, is
the fact that these interactions may
have crucial ‘multiple equilibria’ (see
Section 10.6). Note the two pointswhere the harvesting line crosses therecruitment curve in Figure 15.11a.The point Sis a stable equilibrium but
the point Uis an unstable ‘breakpoint’.
If the population is driven slightly below the MSY density, or even to a level slightly above N
u, a breakpoint, it returns to the MSY
density (Figure 15.11a). But a marginally increased depression in
density, to a level slightly below Nu, perhaps resulting from only
a very small increase in effort, would make the harvesting rategreater than the recruitment rate. The population would be en route to extinction. Moreover, once the population is on this
slippery slope, much more than a marginal reduction in effort 
is required to reverse the process. This is the crucial, practical pointabout multiple equilibria: a very slight change in behavior can lead to a wholly disproportionate change in outcome as the pointof attraction in the system shifts from one stable state to another.Drastic changes in stock abundance can result from only smallchanges in harvesting strategy or small changes in the environment.
15.3.6 Instability of harvested populations:
environmental ﬂuctuations
It is tempting to attribute all ﬁsheries’ collapses simply to
overﬁshing and human greed. Doing so, however, would be anunhelpful oversimpliﬁcation. There is no doubt that ﬁshing pressure often exerts a great strain on the ability of natural popu-lations to sustain levels of recruitment that counteract overall rates
of loss. But the immediate cause of a collapse – in 1 year ratherthan any other – is often the occurrence of unusually unfavor-able environmental conditions. Moreover, when this is the case,the population is more likely to recover (once conditions havereturned to a more favorable state) than it would be if the crashwas the result of overﬁshing alone.
The Peruvian anchovy (see Fig-
ure 15.8), prior to its major collapse from1972 to 1973, had already suffered a
dip in the upward rise in catches in 
the mid-1960s as a result of an ‘El Niño event’: the incursion ofwarm tropical water from the north severely reducing ocean
upwelling, and hence productivity, within the cold Peruvian current coming from the south (see Section 2.4.1). By 1973, however, because ﬁshing intensity had so greatly increased, theeffects of a subsequent El Niño event were much more severe.Moreover, whilst the ﬁshery showed some signs of recoveryfrom 1973 to 1982, in spite of largely unabated ﬁshing pressure,a further collapse occurred in 1983 associated with yet anotherEl Niño event. Clearly, it is unlikely that the consequences of thesenatural perturbations to the usual patterns of current ﬂow wouldhave been so severe if the anchovy had not been exploited or had
been only lightly ﬁshed. It is equally clear, though, that the historyof the Peruvian anchovy ﬁshery cannot be understood properlyin terms simply of ﬁshing, as opposed to natural events.
The three Norwegian and Icelandic
herring ﬁsheries also collapsed in theearly 1970s and had certainly been sub-jected to increasing ﬁshing intensitiesprior to that. Once again, however, an oceanic anomaly is implicated (Beverton, 1993). In the mid-1960s, a mass of cold, low-salinity water from the Arctic Basin formed north of Iceland. Itdrifted south until it became entrained in the Gulf Stream sev-eral years later, and then moved north again – although well tothe east of its southward track. It eventually disappeared off
Norway in 1982 (Figure 15.12a). Data for the number of ‘recruitsper spawner’, essentially the birth rate, are illustrated in Figure15.12b for the Norwegian springspawning and the Icelandicspring- and summer-spawning herring between 1947 and 1990,in terms of the difference each year between that year’s value andthe overall average. Also illustrated are the corresponding yearlytemperature differentials in the Norwegian Sea, reﬂecting the south-ward and northward passage of the anomalous cold water body.There was a good correspondence between the cold water and
poor recruitment in both the Icelandic and Norwegian stocks in the late 1960s and in the Norwegian stocks in 1979–81, theIcelandic stocks being then extinct (spring spawners) or too farwest. It seems likely that the anomalous cold water led to unusu-ally low recruitment, which was strongly instrumental in the crashesexperienced by each of these ﬁsheries.
This cannot, however, account for all the details in Figure 15.12b
– especially the succession of poor recruitment years in the
Norwegian stocks in the 1980s. For this, a more complex explana-tion is required, probably involving other species of ﬁsh and perhaps alternative stable states (Beverton, 1993). None the less,it remains clear that whilst the dangers of overﬁshing should notbe denied, these must be seen within the context of marked andoften unpredictable natural variations. Given the likely effects ofenvironmental conditions on the vital rates of harvested popula-tions, a reliance on models with constant vital rates is even morerisky. Engen et al. (1997) argue that the best harvesting strategies
for such highly variable populations involve constant escapement
(see Section 15.3.4).
•• ••harvesting operations
with multipleequilibria aresusceptible todramatic irreversiblecrashes
the anchoveta and the El Niñoherring and coldwaterEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 455456 CHAPTER 15
15.3.7 Recognizing structure in harvested populations:
dynamic pool models
The simple models of harvesting that
have been described so far are knownas ‘surplus yield’ models. They areuseful as a means of establishing some
basic principles (like MSY), and they are good for investigating the
possible consequences of different types of harvesting strategy.But they ignore population structure, and this is a bad fault 
for two reasons. The ﬁrst is that ‘recruitment’ is, in practice, a complex process incorporating adult survival, adult fecund-ity, juvenile survival, juvenile growth, and so on, each of whichmay respond in its own way to changes in density and harvest-ing strategy. The second reason is that most harvesting practicesare primarily interested in only a portion of the harvested popu-
lation (e.g. mature trees, or ﬁsh that are large enough to be saleable).
The approach that attempts to take these complications into
•• ••N1971–721969–70
1973–74?1977–78mid
1960s1980–821978–80
1976–78(a)(b)
3
–3–2–1012Norwegian spring-spawning herring∆Ln (recruits per spawner)2
1
0
–4–3–2–1Icelandic herring
Spring spawners
2
–3–2–101Summer spawnersTemperature+1°
0
–1°
Year1990 1980 1970 1960 1950(c)
Figure 15.12 (a) The track of a large mass of cold, low-salinity water in the 1960s and 1970s, showing its presence in the Norwegian Sea
both in the mid-1960s and the period 1977–82. (b) Annual differentials between overall averages and ln (recruits per spawner) f or three
herring stocks in the Norwegian Sea, and (c) the temperature in the Norwegian Sea. The Icelandic spring-spawning stock never re covered
from its collapse in the early 1970s, preceded by low recruitment in the 1960s. (After Beverton, 1993.)
‘dynamic pool’
models recognizepopulation structureEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 456ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 457
account involves the construction of what are called ‘dynamic pool’
models.
The general structure of a dynamic pool model is illustrated
in Figure 15.13. The submodels (recruitment rate, growth rate,natural mortality rate and ﬁshing rate of the exploited stock) 
combine to determine the exploitable biomass of the stock andthe way this translates into a yield to the ﬁshing community. In contrast to the surplus yield models, this biomass yielddepends not only on the number of individuals caught but alsoon their size (past growth); whilst the quantity of exploitable (i.e. catchable) biomass depends not just on ‘net recruitment’ but on an explicit combination of natural mortality, harvestingmortality, individual growth and recruitment into catchable ageclasses.
There are many variants on the general theme (e.g. the sub-
models can be dealt with separately in each of the age classes and
submodels can incorporate as much or as little information as isavailable or desirable). In all cases, though, the basic approach isthe same. Available information (both theoretical and empirical)is incorporated into a form that reﬂects the dynamics of the struc-tured population. This then allows the yield and the response ofthe population to different harvesting strategies to be estimated.This in turn should allow a recommendation to the stock-
manager to be formulated. The crucial point is that in the caseof the dynamic pool approach, a harvesting strategy can includenot only a harvesting intensity, but also a decision as to how effortshould be partitioned amongst the various age classes.
A classic example of a dynamic
pool model in action concerned the 
Arcto-Norwegian cod ﬁshery, the mostnortherly of the Atlantic stocks (Garrod& Jones, 1974). The age class structureof the late 1960s was used to predict the medium-term effects on yield of different ﬁshing intensities and different mesh sizes in the trawl. Some of the results are shown in Figure 15.14. The temporary peak after 5 or so years is a result of the very large
1969 year-class working through the population. Overall, how-ever, it is clear that the best longer term prospects were predictedfor a low ﬁshing intensity and a large mesh size. Both of thesegive the ﬁsh more opportunity to grow (and reproduce) beforethey are caught, which is important because yield is measured inbiomass, not simply in numbers. Higher ﬁshing intensities andmesh sizes of 130 mm were predicted to lead to overexploitationof the stock.
•• ••Environmental
variables
e.g. temperature
Growth rateRecruitment
rateEnvironmental
variables
Exploitable stock
biomass
Fishing
mortality
rate
Yield
to humansNatural
mortality
rateEnvironmental
factors
PredatorsReproduction
Egg survivalFry survival  and growthPre-recruit  survival  and growth
ManagementFigure 15.13 The dynamic pool approach
to ﬁshery harvesting and management,
illustrated as a ﬂow diagram. There arefour main ‘submodels’: the growth rate of individuals and the recruitment rate 
into the population (which add to theexploitable biomass), and the naturalmortality rate and the ﬁshing mortality rate (which deplete the exploitablebiomass). Solid lines and arrows refer tochanges in biomass under the inﬂuence ofthese submodels. Dashed lines and arrowsrefer to inﬂuences either of one submodelon another, or of the level of biomass on 
a submodel or of environmental factors on a submodel. Each of the submodels can itself be broken down into morecomplex and realistic systems. Yield tohumans is estimated under various regimescharacterized by particular values insertedinto the submodels. These values may bederived theoretically (in which case theyare ‘assumptions’) or from ﬁeld data. (After Pitcher & Hart, 1982.)
dynamic pool models
can lead to valuablerecommendations . . .EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 457458 CHAPTER 15
Sadly, Garrod and Jones’ recom-
mendations were ignored by those
with the power to determine ﬁshingstrategies. Mesh sizes were not
increased until 1979, and then only from 120 to 125 mm. Fishing
intensity never dropped below 45% and catches of 900,000tonnes were taken in the late 1970s. Not surprisingly perhaps, sur-veys late in 1980 showed that these and other North Atlantic codstocks were very seriously depleted as a result of overﬁshing. NorthSea cod reach sexual maturity around the age of 4 years, but thespecies has been so heavily exploited that some 1 year olds arenow harvested and 2 year olds are almost fully exploited, leav-ing only 4% of 1 year olds to survive to age 4 (Cook et al. , 1997). 
Rattans (climbing spiny palms whose stems are used for
weaving and furniture making in Southeast Asia) are threatened
with overexploitation in a similar way, with harvesters cutting stemstoo young and reducing their ability to resprout (MacKinnon, 1998).15.3.8 Objectives for managing harvestable resources
If we treat the Garrod and Jones example as typical, then we might
conclude that the biologist proposes – but the manager disposes.This is therefore an appropriate point at which to reconsider notonly the objectives of harvesting programs, but also the criteriaby which successful management should be judged and the role
of ecologists in management overall. As Hilborn and Walters (1992)have pointed out, there are three alternative attitudes that eco-logists can take, each of which has been popular but only one of which is sensible. Indeed, these are increasingly important considerations that apply not just to ﬁsheries management butto every entry of ecologists into the public arena.
The ﬁrst is to claim that ecological
interactions are too complex, and ourunderstanding and our data too poor,
for pronouncements of any kind to bemade (for fear of being wrong). Theproblem with this is that if ecologistschoose to remain silent because of some heightened sensitivityto the difﬁculties, there will always be some other, probably lessqualiﬁed ‘expert’ ready to step in with straightforward, not to sayglib, answers to probably inappropriate questions.
The second possibility is for ecologists to concentrate exclus-
ively on ecology and arrive at a recommendation designed to satisfy purely ecological criteria. Any modiﬁcation by managersor politicians of this recommendation is then ascribed to ignorance,inhumanity, political corruption or some other sin or human foible.The problem with this attitude is that it is simply unrealistic in
any human activity to ignore social and economic factors.
The third alternative, then, is for
ecologists to make ecological assess-ments that are as accurate and realisticas possible, but to assume that these willbe incorporated with a broader range of factors when managementdecisions are made. Moreover, these assessments should them-selves take account of the fact that the ecological interactions theyaddress include humans as one of the interacting species, andhumans are subject to social and economic forces. Finally, sinceecological, economic and social criteria must be set alongside oneanother, choosing a single, ‘best’ option is likely to be seen by someinvolved in the decision as an opinion based on the proponent’sparticular set of values. It follows that a single recommendation is,in practice, far less useful in this discourse than laying out a seriesof possible plans of action with their associated consequences.
In the present context, therefore, we develop this third altern-
ative by ﬁrst looking beyond MSY to criteria that incorporate risk,economics, social consequences, and so on (Hilborn & Waters,1992). We then brieﬂy examine the means by which crucial para-meters and variables are estimated in natural populations,since these,by determining the quality of available information, determinethe degree of conﬁdence with which recommendations can be made.
•• ••51 0 2 0 2 5 150800
400600
200130 mm160 mm
145 mm26%Fishing
intensity Mesh sizes
Catch (thousand tons)130 mm160 mm
145 mm
0400600
200
51 0 20 25 1533%
0400600
200
51 0 20 25
Years of this regime1545%
130 mm160 mm
145 mm
Figure 15.14 Garrod and Jones’ (1974) predictions for the Arctic
cod stock under three ﬁshing intensities and with three different
mesh sizes. (After Pitcher & Hart, 1982.)three attitudes for
ecologists towardsmanagers in the real world . . .
. . . but only one ofthem is sensible
. . . but these maystill be ignoredEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 458ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 459
15.3.9 Economic and social factors
Perhaps the most obvious shortcoming
of a purely ecological approach is its failure to recognize that the exploitationof a natural resource is usually a busi-ness enterprise, in which the value of
the harvest must be set against the costs of obtaining that 
harvest. Even if we distance ourselves from any preoccupationwith ‘proﬁt’, it makes no sense to struggle to obtain the last fewtonnes of an MSY if the money spent in doing so could be muchmore effectively invested in some other means of food produc-tion. The basic idea is illustrated in Figure 15.15. We seek to maximize not total yield but net value – the difference betweenthe gross value of the harvest and the sum of the ﬁxed costs (interest payments on ships or factories, insurance, etc.) and the
variable costs, which increase with harvesting effort (fuel, crew’sexpenses, etc.). This immediately suggests that the economic-ally optimum yield (EOY) is less than the MSY, and is obtainedthrough a smaller effort or quota. However, the differencebetween the EOY and the MSY is least in enterprises where most costs are ﬁxed (the ‘total cost’ line is virtually ﬂat). This isespecially the case in high investment, highly technological opera-tions such as deep-sea ﬁsheries, which are therefore most proneto overﬁshing even with management aimed at economic optima.
A second important economic con-
sideration concerns ‘discounting’. Thisrefers to the fact that in economicterms, each bird in the hand now (or
each ﬁsh in the hold) is worth more thanan equivalent bird or ﬁsh some time inthe future. The reason is basically that the value of the current
catch can be placed in the bank to accrue interest, so that its total value increases. In fact, a commonly used discount rate fornatural resources is 10% per annum (90 ﬁsh now are as valuableas 100 ﬁsh in 1 year’s time) despite the fact that the differencebetween the interest rates in the banks and the rate of inﬂationis usually only 2–5%. The economists’ justiﬁcation for this is adesire to incorporate ‘risk’. A ﬁsh caught now has already beencaught; one still in the water might or might not be caught – abird in the hand really is worth two in the bush.
On the other hand, the caught ﬁsh is dead, whereas the ﬁsh
still in the water can grow and breed (although it may also die).
In a very real sense, therefore, each uncaught ﬁsh will be worthmore than ‘one ﬁsh’ in the future. In particular, if the stock leftin the water grows faster than the discount rate, as is commonlythe case, then a ﬁsh put on deposit in the bank is not so soundan investment as a ﬁsh left on deposit in the sea. Nevertheless,even in cases like this, discounting provides an economic argumentfor taking larger harvests from a stock than would otherwise bedesirable.
Moreover, in cases where the stock is less productive than 
the discount rate – for example, many whales and a number of
long-lived ﬁsh – it seems to make sense, in purely economic terms,not only to overﬁsh the stock, but actually to catch every ﬁsh (‘liquidate the stock’). The reasons for not doing so are partly ethical – it would clearly be ecologically short sighted and a dis-dainful way of treating the hungry mouths to be fed in the future.But there are also practical reasons: jobs must be found for those
previously employed in the ﬁshery (or their families otherwiseprovided for), alternative sources of food must be found, and so on. This emphasizes, ﬁrst, that a ‘new economics’ must be forgedin which value is assigned not only to things that can be boughtand sold – like ﬁsh and boats – but also to more abstract entities,like the continued existence of whales or other ‘ﬂagship species’(Hughey et al. , 2002). It also stresses the danger of an economic
perspective that is too narrowly focused. The proﬁtability of aﬁshery cannot sensibly be isolated from the implications that the
management of the ﬁshery has in a wider sphere.
‘Social’ factors enter in two rather
separate ways into plans for the man-agement of natural resources. First,practical politics might dictate, for instance, that a large ﬂeet ofsmall, individually inefﬁcient boats is maintained in an area wherethere are no alternative means of employment. In addition,though, and of much more widespread importance, it is neces-sary for management plans to take full account of the way ﬁshermen and harvesters will behave and respond to changingcircumstances, rather than assuming that they will simply con-form to the requirements for achieving either ecological or eco-
nomic optima. Harvesting involves a predator–prey interaction:it makes no sense to base plans on the dynamics of the prey alonewhilst simply ignoring those of the predator (us!).
•• ••EffortYields and costsEOYNet yield
Total cost
Variable costs
Gross yield
Fixed costs
Figure 15.15 The economically optimum yield (EOY), that
which maximizes ‘proﬁt’, is obtained to the left of the peak of the
yield-against-effort curve, where the difference between gross yieldand total cost (ﬁxed costs plus variable costs) is greatest. At thispoint, the gross yield and total cost lines have the same slope.
(After Hilborn & Walters, 1992.)
social repercussionsthe economically
optimum yield –typically less than the MSY
discounting:liquidating stocks, or leaving them to grow?EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 459460 CHAPTER 15
The idea of the harvester as predator
is reinforced in Figure 15.16, which
shows a classic anticlockwise predator–prey spiral (see Chapter 10) for theNorth Paciﬁc fur seal ﬁshery in the last
years of the 19th century. The ﬁgure illustrates a numerical
response on the part of the predator – extra vessels enter the ﬂeetwhen the stock is abundant, but leave when it is poor. But theﬁgure also illustrates the inevitable time lag in this response. Thus,whatever a modeler or manager might propose, there is unlikelyever to be some perfect match, at an equilibrium, between stocksize and effort. Moreover, whilst the sealers in the ﬁgure left the ﬁshery as quickly as they had entered it, this is by no means
a general rule. The sealers were able to switch to ﬁshing for halibut, but such switches are often not easy to achieve, especiallywhere there has been heavy investment in equipment or long-standing traditions are involved. As Hilborn and Walters (1992)put it, ‘Principle: the hardest thing to do in ﬁsheries managementis reduce ﬁshing pressure’.
Switching is one aspect of a harvester’s predatory behavior 
– its functional response (see Chapter 10). Harvesters will also generally ‘learn’ as there is an inevitable trend towards techno-logical improvement. Even without this, harvesters usuallyimprove their efﬁciency as they learn more about their stock –notwithstanding the assumptions of simple ﬁxed-effort models.
15.3.10 Estimates from data: putting management 
into practice
The role of the ecologist in the man-
agement of a natural resource is instock assessment : making quantitative
predictions about the response of thebiological population to alternative
management choices and addressing questions like whether a given ﬁshing intensity will lead to a decline in the size of the stock,whether nets of a given mesh size will allow the recruitment rate of a stock to recover, and so on. In the past, it has often been assumed that this can be done simply by careful mon-itoring. For example, as effort and yield increase in an expanding ﬁshery, both are monitored, and the relationship between the two is plotted until it seems that the top of a curve like that in 
Figure 15.7 has been reached or just exceeded, identifying the
MSY. This approach, however, is deeply ﬂawed, as can be seen
from Figure 15.17. In 1975, the International Commission for the
Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) used the available data(1964–73) to plot the yield–effort relationship for the yellowﬁntuna ( Thunnus albacares ) in the eastern Atlantic. They felt that they
•• ••200 400 1200 1400 600Fleet size
Herd size0120
80100
60
0 800 100040
201896
1897
1898
189919001895
1891189318921894
18821883 1884188518861888188718901889
Figure 15.16 The ﬂeet size of the North Paciﬁc fur seal ﬁshery
(predators) responded to the size of the seal herd (prey) between
1882 and 1900 by exhibiting an anticlockwise predator–prey spiral.(After Hilborn & Walters, 1992; from data of Wilen, 1976,unpublished observations.)
50 200 240Yield (thousands of tons)
Effort (fishing days × 1000)0100
0 100 15050Present
ICCATanalysis
(1985)
(ICCAT report,1975)81 82
838079
76
757778
74
73726968
6670
64 656771Figure 15.17 Estimated yield–effort
relationships for the eastern Atlantic
yellowﬁn tuna ( Thunnus albacares ) on the
basis of the data for 1964–73 (ICCAT,1975) and 1964–83 (ICCAT, 1985). 
(After Hunter et al. , 1986; Hilborn &
Walters, 1992.)monitoring effort and
yield: the difﬁcultiesof ‘ﬁnding the top ofthe curve’             
harvester aspredator: humanbehaviorEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 460ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 461
had reached the top of the curve: a sustainable yield of around
50,000 tons (5.1 ×107kg) and an optimum effort of about 60,000
ﬁshing days. However, ICCAT were unable to prevent effort (andyield) rising further, and it soon became clear that the top of thecurve had not been reached. A reanalysis using data up to 1983suggested a sustainable yield of around 110,000 tons (1.1 ×10
8kg)
and an effort of 240,000 ﬁshing days.
This illustrates what Hilborn and Walters (1992) describe as
another principle: ‘You cannot determine the potential yield froma ﬁsh stock without overexploiting it’. At least part of the reason
for this is the tendency, already noted, for the variability in yieldto increase as an MSY is approached. Furthermore, if we also recallthe previously described difﬁculty in reducing ﬁshing pressure, itis clear that in practice, managers are likely to have to wrestlewith the combined challenge of estimation difﬁculties, ecologicalrelationships (here, between yield and predictability) and socio-economic factors (here, concerning the regulation and reductionin effort). We have moved a long way from the simple ﬁxed-effortmodels of Section 15.3.3.
The practical difﬁculties of parameter estimation are further
illustrated in Figure 15.18, which displays the time series for total
catch, ﬁshing effort and catch per unit effort (CPUE) between 1969and 1982 for yellowﬁn tuna for the whole Atlantic Ocean. As effortincreased, CPUE declined – presumably, a reﬂection of a dimin-ishing stock of ﬁsh. On the other hand, the catch continued torise over this period, suggesting that perhaps the stock was notyet being overﬁshed (i.e. the MSY had not yet been reached). These,then, are the data, and they come in probably the most commonlyavailable form – a so-called ‘one-way trip’ time series. But can theysuggest an MSY and can they suggest the effort required to achievethat MSY? Certainly, methods exist for performing the necessarycalculations, but these methods require assumptions to be made
about the underlying dynamics of the
population.
The most frequently used assump-
tion describes the dynamics of thestock biomass, B, by:
(15.2)
(Schaefer, 1954), which is simply the logistic equation of Chapter 5 (intrinsic rate of increase, r, carrying capacity, K) with
a harvesting rate incorporated. The latter may itself be given, following Equation 15.1 (see Section 15.3.3), by H=qEB, 
where qis harvesting efﬁciency and Ethe harvesting effort. By
deﬁnition:
CPUE =H/E=qB. (15.3)
Hence:
B=CPUE/ q (15.4)
  d
dB
trBB
KH       =−⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟− 1and Equation 15.2 can be rewritten in terms of CPUE with either
Hor Eas variables, and with r, qand Kas parameters. For this
model, the MSY is given by rK/4 and the effort required to
achieve this by r/2q.
There are a number of methods 
of obtaining estimates of these para-
meters from ﬁeld data, perhaps thebest of which is the ﬁtting of curves totime series (Hilborn & Walters, 1992).However, when the time series is a one-way trip, as we have notedit often is, there is no unique ‘best’ set of parameter values. Table 15.4, for instance, shows the parameters for three separatecurves ﬁtted to the data in Figure 15.18, providing equally goodﬁts (the same sum of squares), but with widely differing param-
eter values. There are, in effect, a large number of equally goodalternative explanations for the data in Figure 15.18, in some ofwhich, for example, the population has a low carrying capacitybut a high intrinsic rate of increase and is being harvested 
•• ••time series analysis is
best – but answersare still equivocalCPUE
Year06
1968 1983Effort
(fishing days
×103)
080Catch
(tons ×103)
0120
Figure 15.18 Changes in total catch, ﬁshing effort and catch per
unit effort (CPUE) between 1969 and 1982 for the yellowﬁn tuna
(Thussus albacares ) in the Atlantic Ocean. Also shown are three
separate curves ﬁtted to the CPUE time series by methodsoutlined in the text, the parameters of which are given in 
Table 15.4. (After Hilborn & Walters, 1992.)
estimates from 
catch and effort data:applying the SchaefermodelEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 461462 CHAPTER 15
efﬁciently, whereas in others it has a high carrying capacity, a low 
rate of increase and is being harvested less efﬁciently. In the ﬁrst case, the MSY had probably already been reached in 1980; in the second, catches could probably be doubled with impunity.Moreover, in each of these cases, the population is assumed to
be behaving in conformity with Equation 15.2, which may itselfbe wide of the mark.
It is clear, therefore, even from this
limited range of rather arbitrarily chosenexamples, that there are immense lim-itations placed on stock assessmentsand management plans by inadequacies
in both the available data and the means of analyzing them. Thisis not meant, though, to be a council of despair. Management 
decisions must be made, and the best possible stock assessmentsmust form the basis – although not the sole basis – for these decisions. It is regrettable that we do not know more, but the problem would be compounded if we pretended that we did.Moreover, the ecological, economic and human behavioral ana-lyses are important – as all analyses are – for identifying what we do notknow, since, armed with this knowledge, we can set
about obtaining whate ver information is most useful. This has been 
formalized, in fact, in an ‘adaptive management’ approach, where,in an ‘actively adaptive’ strategy, a policy is sought which offerssome balance between, on the one hand, probing for information(directed experimentation), and on the other, exercising cautionabout losses in short-term yield and long-term overﬁshing
(Hilborn & Walters, 1992). Indeed, there is a strong argument thatsays that the inadequacies in data and theory make the need forecologists all the more profound: who else can appreciate the uncer-tainties and provide appropriately enlightened interpretations?
However, to be realistic, manag-
ing most marine ﬁsheries to achieveoptimum yields will be very difﬁcult to achieve. There are generally toofew researchers to do the work and, in
many parts of the world, no researchers at all. In these situations,a precautionary approach to ﬁsheries management might involvelocking away a proportion of a coastal or coral community inmarine protected areas (Hall, 1998). The term dataless management
has been applied to situations where local villagers follow simpleprescriptions to make sustainability more likely. For example
locals on the Paciﬁc island of Vanuatu were provided with somesimple principles of management for their trochus ( Tectus 
niloticus ) shellﬁshery (stocks should be harvested every 3 years and
left unﬁshed in between) with an apparently successful outcome
( Johannes, 1998).
15.4 The metapopulation perspective in
management
A repeated theme in previous chapters has been the spatial
patchiness upon which population interactions are often playedout. Managers need to understand the implications of such heterogeneous landscape structure when making their decisions.Various approaches are available to improve our understanding
of populations in complex landscapes and we consider two in the following sections. First, landscapes with different degrees of habitat loss and fragmentation can be artiﬁcially created at ascale appropriate to populations of interest and their behavior can then be assessed in carefully controlled experiments (seeSection 15.4.1 – in the context of biological control of pests). Second,simple deterministic models can throw light on the factors thatneed to be taken into account when managing populations in ahabitat patchwork (see Section 15.4.2 – in the context of creating
protected areas for ﬁsheries management). We also saw earlier(see Section 7.5.6 – in the context of a reserve patchwork for anendangered species) how stochastic simulation models can be usedto compare management scenarios where subpopulations exist ina metapopulation.
15.4.1 Biological control in a fragmented landscape
We know that spatial heterogeneity
can stabilize predator–prey interac-tions (e.g. Chapter 10). However, thedynamics of pests and their biologicalcontrol agents may become destabil-
ized, resulting in pest outbreaks, ifhabitat change occurs at a scale that
•• ••Table 15.4 Parameter estimates from three ﬁts to the catch per unit effort (CPUE) time series for yellowﬁn tuna shown in Figure 15.18. 
ris the intrinsic rate of increase, Kis the carrying capacity (equilibrium abundance in the absence of harvesting) and qis the harvesting
efﬁciency. Effort is measured in ﬁshing days; Kand maximum sustainable yield (MSY) in tons. (After Hilborn & Walters, 1992.)
Fit number r K (×1000 ) q (×10−7) MSY (×1000 ) Effort at MSY (×1000 ) Sum of squares
1 0.18 2103 9.8 98 92 3.8
2 0.15 4000 4.5 148 167 3.83 0.13 8000 2.1 261 310 3.8
these uncertainties
make ecologists allthe more valuable
‘dataless management’ where no estimatesare available?
natural enemysuccess may depend on predationefﬁciency in a patchyhabitatEIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 462ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 463
interferes with the search behavior of a control agent (Kareiva,
1990).
With et al. (2002) created replicate landscapes (plots) of red 
clover ( Trifolium pratense ), each 16 ×16 m, that differed in terms
of clover abundance (10, 20, 40, 50, 60 and 80% T. pratense ). Their
aim was to explore whether thresholds in landscape structure 
precipitate similar thresholds in the distribution of a pest aphid,Acyrthosiphon pisum , and to discover how landscape structure
affects the search behavior of two ladybird beetle predators ofaphids, one an introduced biocontrol agent, Harmonia axyridis , 
the other a native species, Coleomegilla maculata . Colonization by
the aphids and beetles was by natural immigration to the outdoorplots.
Lacunarity is an index of aggregation derived from fractal geo-
metry that quantiﬁes the variability in the distribution of gap sizes
(distances among clover patches in the landscape). The distribu-tion of clover in the experimental landscapes showed a thresholdat 20% habitat, indicating that gap sizes became greater andmore variable below this level (Figure 15.19a). This threshold wasmirrored by the aphids (Figure 15.19b) and was strongly trackedby the exotic control agent ( H. axyridis ) but not the native 
predator ( C. maculata ) (Figure 15.19c, d).
Although the native ladybird foraged more actively among 
stems within the clover cells, overall it was less mobile and movedless between clover cells in the landscape than the introduced ladybird, which showed a greater tendency to ﬂy (Table15.5). With
its greater mobility, the introduced species was more effective attracking aphids when they occurred at low patch occupancy, aprerequisite for successful biological control (Murdoch & Briggs,1996).
Findings such as these have implications both for the selec-
tion of effective biological control agents and for the design of
agricultural systems, which may need to be managed to preservehabitat connectivity and thus enhance the efﬁciency of natural enemies and/or biological control agents (Barbosa, 1998).
15.4.2 Designing reserve networks for ﬁsheries
management
Over the last decade or so, coastal
marine reserves or no-take zones havebeen promoted as a means of manag-ing ﬁsheries (e.g. Holland & Brazee,1996). This is another example where 
an understanding of landscape structure, and metapopulationdynamics, will be necessary to devise management strategies.Probably the most fundamental questions of reserve design arethe fraction of coastline that should be set aside and the appro-priate size (and number) of reserves needed in relation to the 
•• ••ﬁshery management
using no-take zones:metapopulationconsiderationsLacunarity index50
010203040
80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0(c)
Habitat abundance (% clover) Habitat abundance (% clover)
Lacunarity index60
50
010203040
80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0(d)50
010203040
80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0(b)
Lacunarity index10
02468
80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0(a)
Lacunarity index
Figure 15.19 The distribution pattern (lacunarity index – a measure of aggregation) of (a) clover (i.e. habitat) and populations of (b) pest
aphids, (c) an introduced ladybird beetle control agent ( Harmonia axyridis ) and (d) a native ladybird beetle ( Coleomegilla maculata ). In these
experiments, clover plants were clumped together as opposed to being dispersed through the landscape. Error bars are ±1 SE. (After With
et al. , 2002.)EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 463464 CHAPTER 15
dispersal potential of the target species. Hastings and Botsford (2003)
developed a simple deterministic model to answer these questionsfor a hypothetical species with characteristics that are most likelyto beneﬁt from no-take zones: one with sedentary adults and dis-persing larvae. Their approach is based on the idea that altering
the spacing and width of reserves changes the fraction of larvaethat are retained within or exported from reserves (Figure 15.20).It is, of course, larval export that provides the basis for a sustainableyield from nonreserve areas.
The MSY problem can be stated as ‘ﬁx the level of larval 
retention within reserves, F, to preserve the species, and adjust
the fraction of coastline in reserves, c, to maximize the number
of larvae that settle outside the reserves (available as yield)’.Note that because Fremains constant (something the modelers
have chosen to assume), changing cmeans changing the width
of reserves. Suppose that a value of Fof 0.35 is deemed neces-
sary to maintain the species. The solid line in Figure 15.20b
shows how c and reserve width need to change to maintain an 
Fof 0.35. The mathematical details of the model need not 
concern us but it turns out that although the largest yield is obtained when the reserves are as small as possible (the arrow inFigure 15.20b), so that larval export to ﬁshed areas is maximized,the yield is only slightly reduced as the reserve conﬁguration movesaway from this optimum. Thus, Hastings and Botsford (2003) argue that practical considerations, such as making reserves large enough to be enforced, can be allowed to play a major partin reserve design, as long as reserves are not so large (beyond 
the ‘shoulder’ of the curve in Figure 15.20b) as to signiﬁcantlydepress yield.
Although the model is a gross simpliﬁcation, particularly in
terms of the lack of any uncertainty or temporal or spatial hetero-geneity, it usefully highlights some general considerations ofimportance and provides a starting point for more sophisticatedand species-speciﬁc models to address the question of whetherreserve networks will be useful for ﬁsheries management.In each of the sections of this chapter we have sought to build
on relatively simple concepts by gradually adding more elements
of realism. However, it should be remembered that even our mostcomplex examples still lack realism in terms of the web of speciesinteractions within which the target species are embedded. In fact,
many management solutions have to be focused at a higher level of ecological organization – multispecies communities andwhole ecosystems. We deal with the ecology of communities andecosystems in Chapters 16–21 before considering ecologicalapplications at this ecological level in Chapter 22.
Summary
Sustainability is a core concept in an ever-broadening concern 
for the fate of the earth and the ecological communities that occupyit. In this chapter we deal with two key aspects of ecological management – the control of pests and the management of harvests of wild populations. Each depends on an understanding
of population interactions (discussed in Chapters 8–14) and eachhas sustainability as a primary aim.
One might imagine that the goal of pest control is total 
eradication but this is generally restricted to cases where a newpest has invaded a region and a rapid effort is made to completelyeliminate it. Usually, the aim is to reduce the pest population to a level at which it does not pay to achieve yet more control(the economic injury level or EIL). In this way, we can see thateconomics and sustainability are intimately tied together. When
a pest population has reached a density at which it is causing economic injury, however, it is generally too late to start con-trolling it. More important, then, is the economic threshold(ET): the density of the pest at which action should be taken toprevent it reaching the EIL.
We describe the tool kit of chemical pesticides and herbicides.
These are a key part of the armory of pest managers but they
•• ••Introduced Native
Scale and behavior measure Harmonia axyridis Coleomegilla maculata
Within clover cells
Stems visited per minute 0.80 ±0.05 1.20 ±0.07
Between clover cells
Cells visited per minute 0.22 ±0.07 0.10 ±0.04
Primary mode of movement Fly Crawl
Plot-wide movement
Mean step length (m) 1.90 ±0.21 1.10 ±0.04
Displacement ratio 0.49 ±0.05 0.19 ±0.03Table 15.5 Search behavior of introduced
and native labybird beetles at different
scales in experimental clover landscapes.Values are means ±1 SE. Each 16 ×16 m
plot contains 256 cells (each 1 m
2); clover
cells are those cells in which clover waspresent. For individual ladybirds that madeat least ﬁve cell transitions, plot-widemovements were quantiﬁed in terms of
mean step length and displacement ratio.Displacement ratio is net displacement(straight-line distance) divided by overallpath length. (After With et al., 2002.)EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 464ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: PEST CONTROL AND HARVEST MANAGEMENT 465
have to be used with care because of the possibility of ‘target 
pest resurgence’ (when treatment affects the pest’s natural enem-ies more than the pest itself) and ‘secondary pest outbreaks’(when natural enemies of ‘potential’ pests are strongly affected,
allowing potential pests to become actual pests). Pests are also
adept at evolving resistance to pesticides.
An alternative to chemical pesticides is biological manipula-
tion of the natural enemies of the pests. Biological control may
involve: (i) ‘introduction’, with the expectation of long-term persistence, of a natural enemy from another geographic area (oftenthe one from where the pest originated); (ii) the manipulation of natural predators already present (‘conservation biologicalcontrol’); (iii) the periodic release of an agent that is unable topersist through the year but provides control for one or a few
pest generations (‘inoculation’); or (iv) the release of large num-bers of enemies, which will not persist, to kill only those pestspresent at the time (‘inundation’, sometimes called, by analogy,biological pesticides). Biological control is by no means alwaysenvironmentally friendly. Examples are coming to light where even carefully chosen and apparently successful introductions ofbiological control agents have impacted on nontarget species, both
by affecting nontarget species related to the pest and by affect-ing other species that interact in food webs with the nontargetspecies.
Integrated pest management (IPM) is a practical philosophy 
of pest management that is ecologically based but uses all 
methods of control, including chemicals, when appropriate. It relies heavily on natural mortality factors such as weather and natural enemies.
Whenever, a natural population is exploited by harvesting there
is a risk of overexploitation. But harvesters also want to avoid under-exploitation, where potential consumers are deprived and thosewho harvest are underemployed. Thus, as with many areas ofapplied ecology, there are important economic and sociopolitical
perspectives to consider.
The concept of the maximum sustainable yield (MSY) has 
been a guiding principle in harvest management. We describe the different approaches to obtain an MSY – taking a ﬁxed quota, regulating harvest effort, harvesting a constant propor-tion or allowing constant escapement – and we point out the 
•• ••Figure 15.20 (a) Schematic representation
of a network of marine reserves (white)
and ﬁshed areas (gray). The fraction ofcoastline in the reserves is c, the fraction 
of larvae produced in the reserves is F, 
and the fraction of larvae produced in
reserves that are exported is 1 −F. (b) The
combination of values of the fraction ofcoastline in reserves, c, and mean width of
reserve (in units of mean dispersal distance)that yield a value of 0.35 for the fraction of larvae that are retained within reserves,F, along with similar combinations for
other values of F. The arrow indicates the
conﬁguration that produces the maximum
ﬁshing yield outside the reserves. (AfterHastings & Botsford, 2003.)0.20.40.60.8Fraction in reserves1.0
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
Width of reserve (in dispersal units)2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0F
1 – F 1 – FFF
(b)(a)EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 465466 CHAPTER 15
shortcomings of each. More reliable approaches to sustainable
harvesting are also discussed, including dynamic pool models (which recognize that all individuals in the harvested populationare not equivalent and incorporate population structure into thepopulation models) and approaches that explicitly incorporate eco-
nomic factors (dealing with economically optimum yield, OEY,rather than simply MSY). We also note that no data are availablefor many of the world’s ﬁsheries, especially in developing areasof the world; in these cases, simple ‘dataless’ management prin-
ciples may be the best that ecologists can propose.
Finally, many populations, including those of pests and harvested
populations, exist in a heterogeneous environment, sometimes asmetapopulations. Managers need to be aware of this possibility,
for instance when determining which biological control agent touse in an agricultural landscape or when designing a network of‘no-take’ zones as part of a ﬁsheries management strategy.
••EIPC15  10/24/05  2:09 PM  Page 466••Introduction
In nature, areas of land and volumes of water contain assemblages
of different species, in different proportions and doing differentthings. These communities of organisms have properties that are the sum of the properties of the individual denizens plus theirinteractions. The interactions are what make the community
more than the sum of its parts. Just as it is a reasonable aim fora physiologist to study the behavior of different sorts of cells andtissues and then attempt to use a knowledge of their interactionsto explain the behavior of a whole organism, so ecologists mayuse their knowledge of interactions between organisms in anattempt to explain the behavior and structure of a whole com-munity. Community ecology, then, is the study of patterns in thestructure and behavior of multispecies assemblages. Ecosystemecology, on the other hand, is concerned with the structure and
behavior of the same systems but with a focus on the ﬂux of energyand matter.
We consider ﬁrst the nature of the community. Community
ecologists are interested in how groupings of species are dis-tributed, and the ways these groupings can be inﬂuenced by bothabiotic and biotic environmental factors. In Chapter 16 we startby explaining how the structure of communities can be measuredand described, before focusing on patterns in community struc-ture in space, in time and ﬁnally in a more complex, but morerealistic spatiotemporal setting.
Communities, like all biological entities, require matter for 
their construction and energy for their activities. We examine the ways in which arrays of feeders and their food bind the
inhabitants of a community into a web of interacting elements,through which energy (Chapter 17) and matter (Chapter 18) aremoved. This ecosystem approach involves primary producers,decomposers and detritivores, a pool of dead organic matter, herbivores, carnivores and parasites plus the physicochemical
environment that provides living conditions and acts both as a
source and a sink for energy and matter. In Chapter 17, we dealwith large-scale patterns in primary productivity before turningto the factors that limit productivity, and its fate, in terrestrial and aquatic settings. In Chapter 18, we consider the ways in whichthe biota accumulates, transforms and moves matter between the
various components of the ecosystem.
In Chapter 19 we return to some key population interactions
dealt with earlier in the book, and consider the ways that com-
petition, predation and parasitism can shape communities. Thenin Chapter 20 we recognize that the inﬂuence of a particular species often ramiﬁes beyond a particular competitor, prey or hostpopulation, through the whole food web. The study of food webslies at the interface of community and ecosystem ecology and 
we focus both on the population dynamics of interacting speciesin the community and on the consequences for ecosystem pro-cesses such as productivity and nutrient ﬂux.
In Chapter 21 we attempt an overall synthesis of the factors,
both abiotic and biotic, that determine species richness. Why the number of species varies from place to place, and from timeto time, are interesting questions in their own right as well as being questions of practical importance. We will see that a fullunderstanding of patterns in species richness has to draw on an understanding of all the ecological topics dealt with in earlierchapters of the book.
Finally, in the last of our trilogy of chapters dealing with the
application of ecological theory, we consider in Chapter 22 theapplication of theory related to succession, food web ecology,
ecosystem functioning and biodiversity. We conclude by recog-nizing that the application of ecological theory never proceeds inisolation – the sustainable use of natural resources requires thatwe also incorporate economic and sociopolitical perspectives.
Part 3
Communities and
Ecosystems
EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 467468 PART 3
To pursue an analogy we introduced earlier, the study of 
ecology at the community/ecosystem level is a little like making
a study of watches and clocks. A collection can be made and thecontents of each timepiece classiﬁed. We can recognize charac-teristics that they have in common in the way they are constructedand patterns in the way they behave. But to understand how they work, they must be taken to pieces, studied and put backtogether again. We will have understood the nature of naturalcommunities when we know how to recreate those that we have,
often inadvertently, taken to pieces.
••EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 468••16.1 Introduction
Physiological and behavioral ecologists are concerned primarily
with individual organisms. Coexisting individuals of a single
species possess characteristics – such as density, sex ratio, age-class structure, rates of natality and immigration, mortality andemigration – that are unique to populations. We explain the be-
havior of a population in terms of the behavior of the individuals
that comprise it. In their turn, activities at the population levelhave consequences for the next level up – that of the community.
The community is an assemblage of species populations that occurtogether in space and time. Community ecology seeks to under-stand the manner in which groupings of species are distributedin nature, and the ways these groupings can be inﬂuenced by theirabiotic environment (Part 1 of this textbook) and by interactionsamong species populations (Part 2). One challenge for com-
munity ecologists is to discern and explain patterns arising fromthis multitude of inﬂuences.
In very general terms, the species
that assemble to make up a com-munity are determined by: (i) dispersal constraints; (ii) environmental con-
straints; and (iii) internal dynamics (Figure 16.1) (Belyea &Lancaster, 1999). Ecologists search for rules of community
assembly, and we discuss these in this chapter and a number of others (particularly Chapters 19–21).
A community is composed of indi-
viduals and populations, and we can
identify and study straightforward collective properties, such as species
diversity and community biomass.However, we have already seen thatorganisms of the same and differentspecies interact with each other in processes of mutualism, parasitism, predation and competition.
The nature of the community is obviously more than just the sum of its constituent species. There are emergent properties that
appear when the community is the focus of attention, as thereare in other cases where we are concerned with the behavior of complex mixtures. A cake has emergent properties of textureand ﬂavor that are not apparent simply from a survey of the 
ingredients. In the case of ecological communities, the limits to
similarity of competing species (see Chapter 19) and the stabilityof the food web in the face of disturbance (see Chapter 20) areexamples of emergent properties.
the search for rules of
community assembly
communities have collectiveproperties . . .. . . and emergentproperties notpossessed by theindividualpopulations thatcomprise themEnvironmental
constraints
Internal dynamicsEcological
species pool
CommunityTotal species pool
Dispersal
constraints
Geographic
species poolHabitat
species pool
Figure 16.1 The relationships among ﬁve types of species 
pools: the total pool of species in a region, the geographic pool
(species able to arrive at a site), the habitat pool (species able topersist under the abiotic conditions of the site), the ecological pool (the overlapping set of species that can both arrive and persist) 
and the community (the pool that remains in the face of bioticinteractions). (Adapted from Belyea & Lancaster, 1999; Booth &Swanton, 2002.)
Chapter 16
The Nature of the
Community: Patterns 
in Space and TimeEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 469470 CHAPTER 16
Science at the community level poses daunting problems
because the database may be enormous and complex. A ﬁrst step
is usually to search for patterns in the community’s collective andemergent properties. Patterns are repeated consistencies, such as the repeated grouping of similar growth forms in different places,
or repeated trends in species richness along different environ-mental gradients. Recognition of patterns leads, in turn, to theforming of hypotheses about the causes of these patterns. Thehypotheses may then be tested by making further observationsor by doing experiments.
A community can be deﬁned at any scale within a hierarchy
of habitats. At one extreme, broad patterns in the distribution of community types can be recognized on a global scale. The temperate forest biome is one example; its range in North
America is shown in Figure 16.2. At this scale, ecologists usuallyrecognize climate as the overwhelming factor that determines thelimits of vegetation types. At a ﬁner scale, the temperate forestbiome in parts of New Jersey is represented by communities of two species of tree in particular, beech and maple, togetherwith a very large number of other, less conspicuous species ofplants, animals and microorganisms. Study of the community may be focused at this scale. On an even ﬁner habitat scale, thecharacteristic invertebrate community that inhabits water-ﬁlledholes in beech trees may be studied, or the ﬂora and fauna in the gut of a deer in the forest. Amongst these various scales of com-munity study, no one is more legitimate than another. The scaleappropriate for investigation depends on the sorts of questions
that are being asked.
Community ecologists sometimes
consider all of the organisms existingtogether in one area, although it is rarely
possible to do this without a large teamof taxonomists. Others restrict theirattention within the community to a single taxonomic group (e.g.birds, insects or trees), or a group with a particular activity (e.g.herbivores or detritivores).
The rest of this chapter is in six sections. We start by explain-
ing how the structure of communities can be measured anddescribed (Section 16.2). Then we focus on patterns in communitystructure: in space (Section 16.3), in time (Sections 16.4–16.6) and
ﬁnally in a combined spatiotemporal setting (Section 16.7).
16.2 Description of community composition
One way to characterize a community
is simply to count or list the species thatare present. This sounds a straight-forward procedure that enables us todescribe and compare communities by
their species ‘richness’ (i.e. the number of species present). In practice, though, it is often surprisingly difﬁcult, partly because
•• ••
Temperate forest
biome in NorthAmericaInvertebrate
community of a water-filled tree-hole of abeech treeThe flora andfauna of thegut of a deerBeech–maplewoodland
Figure 16.2 We can identify a hierarchy of habitats, nesting one into the other: a temperate forest biome in North America; 
a beech–maple woodland in New Jersey; a water-ﬁlled tree hole; or a mammalian gut. The ecologist may choose to study the 
community that exists on any of these scales.
communities can 
be recognized at avariety of levels – allequally legitimate
species richness: the number ofspecies present in a communityEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 470THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 471
of taxonomic problems, but also because only a subsample of the
organisms in an area can usually be counted. The number of speciesrecorded then depends on the number of samples that have beentaken, or on the volume of the habitat that has been explored.The most common species are likely to be represented in the 
ﬁrst few samples, and as more samples are taken, rarer specieswill be added to the list. At what point does one cease to takefurther samples? Ideally, the investigator should continue tosample until the number of species reaches a plateau (Figure 16.3).At the very least, the species richnesses of different communitiesshould be compared on the basis of the same sample sizes (in termsof area of habitat explored, time devoted to sampling or, best ofall, number of individuals or modules included in the samples).The analysis of species richness in contrasting situations ﬁgures
prominently in Chapter 21.
16.2.1 Diversity indices
An important aspect of community
structure is completely ignored, though,when the composition of the com-munity is described simply in terms 
of the number of species present. It misses the information 
that some species are rare and others common. Consider a com-munity of 10 species with equal numbers in each, and a secondcommunity, again consisting of 10 species, but with more than50% of the individuals belonging to the most common speciesand less than 5% in each of the other nine. Each community hasthe same species richness, but the ﬁrst, with a more ‘equitable’distribution of abundances, is clearly more diverse than the 
second. Richness and equitablity combine to determine com-munity diversity.Knowing the numbers of individuals present in each species
may not provide a full answer either. If the community is closely
deﬁned (e.g. the warbler community of a woodland), counts ofthe number of individuals in each species may sufﬁce for manypurposes. However, if we are interested in all the animals in thewoodland, then their enormous disparity in size means that simplecounts would be very misleading. There are also problems if wetry to count plants (and other modular organisms). Do we countthe number of shoots, leaves, stems, ramets or genets? One wayround this problem is to describe the community in terms of thebiomass per species per unit area.
The simplest measure of the 
character of a community that takes
into account both the abundance (orbiomass) patterns and the species richness, is Simpson’s diversityindex. This is calculated by determining, for each species, the proportion of individuals or biomass that it contributes to the total in the sample, i.e. the proportion is P
ifor the ith species:
(16.1)
where Sis the total number of species in the community (i.e. 
the richness). As required, for a given richness, Dincreases with
equitability, and for a given equitability, Dincreases with richness.
Equitability can itself be quantiﬁed
(between 0 and 1) by expressing
Simpson’s index, D, as a proportion of
the maximum possible value Dwould
assume if individuals were completely evenly distributed amongst
the species. In fact, Dmax=S. Thus:
(16.2)
Another index that is frequently
used and has essentially similar prop-
erties is the Shannon diversity index, H.
This again depends on an array of Pi
values. Thus:
diversity, H=− lnPi (16.3)
and:
(16.4)
  equitability,     ln
ln .
maxJH
HPP
Sii
iS
==−
=∑
1  Pi
iS
=∑
1  equitability,       .
maxED
DPS
i
iS== ×
=∑11
2
1  Simpson’s index,   , D
Pi
iS=
=∑1
2
1
•• ••diversity incorporates
richness, commonnessand raritySimpson’s diversityindex
‘equitability’ or‘evenness’
Shannon’s diversityindex400 1600Number of species in sample
Number of individuals in sample080
60
0 120040
20Community A
Community B
800
Figure 16.3 The relationship between species richness and 
the number of individual organisms from two contrasting
hypothetical communities. Community A has a total speciesrichness considerably in excess of community B.EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 471472 CHAPTER 16
An example of an analysis of diversity is provided by a
uniquely long-term study that has been running since 1856 in an
area of grassland at Rothamsted in England. Experimental plotshave received a fertilizer treatment once every year, whilst con-trol plots have not. Figure 16.4 shows how species diversity ( H)
and equitability ( J) of the grass species changed between 1856
and 1949. Whilst the unfertilized area has remained essentially
unchanged, the fertilized area has shown a progressive decline in diversity and equitability. One possible explanation may be that high nutrient availability leads to high rates of populationgrowth and a greater chance of the most productive speciescoming to dominate and, perhaps, competitively exclude others.
16.2.2 Rank–abundance diagrams
Of course, attempts to describe a complex community structure
by one single attribute, such as richness, diversity or equitabil-ity, can be criticized because so much valuable information is lost. A more complete picture of the distribution of species abundances in a community makes use of the full array of P
i
values by plotting Piagainst rank. Thus, the Pifor the most 
abundant species is plotted ﬁrst, then the next most common, and so on until the array is completed by the rarest species of all. A rank–abundance diagram can be drawn for the number of individuals, or for the area of ground covered by different sessile
species, or for the biomass contributed to a community by thevarious species.
A range of the many equations that
have been ﬁtted to rank–abundancediagrams is shown in Figure 16.5. Two of these are statistical in origin (the log series and log-normal) with nofoundation in any assumptions abouthow the species may interact with one another. The others 
take some account of the relationships between the conditions,resources and species-abundance patterns (niche-orientatedmodels) and are more likely to help us understand the mechan-isms underlying community organization (Tokeshi, 1993). We illustrate the diversity of approaches by describing the basis of four of Tokeshi’s niche-orientated models (see Tokeshi, 1993, fora complete treatment). The dominance–preemption model , which 
produces the least equitable species distribution, has successivespecies preempting a dominant portion (50% or more) of theremaining niche space; the ﬁrst, most dominant species takes more than 50% of the total niche space, the next more than 50% of what remains, and so on. A somewhat more equitabledistribution is represented by the random fraction model , in which
successive species invade and take over an arbitrary portion of
the niche space of any species previously present. In this case, irrespective of their dominance status, all species are subjectedto niche division with equal probability. The MacArthur fraction
model , on the other hand, assumes that species with larger 
niches are more likely to be invaded by new species; this resultsin a more equitable distribution than the random fraction model. Finally, the dominance–decay model is the inverse of the 
dominance–preemption model, in that the largest niche in an existing assemblage is always subject to a subsequent (random)division. Thus, in this model the next invading species is sup-posed to colonize the niche space of the species currently mostabundant, yielding the most equitable species abundances of 
all the models.
Rank–abundance diagrams, like
indices of richness, diversity and equit-ability, should be viewed as abstrac-tions of the highly complex structure ofcommunities that may be useful whenmaking comparisons. In principle, the idea is that ﬁnding the bestﬁtting model should give us clues as to underlying processes, andperhaps as to how these vary from sample to sample. Progress
so far, however, has been limited, both because of problems of interpretation and the practical difﬁculty of testing for the best ﬁt between model and data (Tokeshi, 1993). However,some studies have successfully focused attention on a change indominance/evenness relationships in relation to environmentalchange. Figure 16.5c shows how, assuming a geometric series can be appropriately applied, dominance steadily increased,whilst species richness decreased, during the Rothamsted long-
term grassland experiment described above. Figure 16.5d showshow invertebrate species richness and equitability were bothgreater on an architecturally complex stream plant Ranunculus
yezoensis , which provides more potential niches, than on a struc-
turally simple plant Sparganium emersum . The rank–abundance 
diagrams of both are closer to the random fraction model thanthe MacArthur fraction model. Finally, Figure 16.5e shows howattached bacterial assemblages (bioﬁlms), during colonization of
•• ••31.0
0.5
02
1
0
1850 1900 1950Species diversity ( H)
(Control              Fertilized            )
Equitability (J )
(Control              Fertilized            )Control H
Control J
Fertilized J
Fertilized H
Year
Figure 16.4 Species diversity ( H) and equitability ( J) of a 
control plot and a fertilized plot in the Rothamsteard ‘Parkgrass’
experiment. (After Tilman, 1982.)
rank–abundance
models may be basedon statistical orbiological argumentscommunity indicesare abstractions thatmay be useful whenmaking comparisonsEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 472THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 473
glass slides in a lake, change from a log-normal to a geometric
pattern as the bioﬁlm ages.
Taxonomic composition and species
diversity are just two of many pos-sible ways of describing a community.
Another alternative (not necessarilybetter but quite different) is to describecommunities and ecosystems in termsof their standing crop and the rate of
production of biomass by plants, and its use and conversion by heterotrophic microorganisms and animals. Studies that areorientated in this way may begin by describing the food web, andthen deﬁne the biomasses at each trophic level and the ﬂow of
energy and matter from the physical environment through theliving organisms and back to the physical environment. Such anapproach can allow patterns to be detected amongst communitiesand ecosystems that may have no taxonomic features in common.
This approach will be discussed in Chapters 17 and 18.
Much recent research effort has been devoted to understand-
ing the link between species richness and ecosystem functioning(productivity, decomposition and nutrient dynamics). Under-standing the role of species richness in ecosystem processes hasparticular signiﬁcance for how humans respond to biodiversity loss.We discuss this important topic in Section 21.7.
•• ••the energetics
approach: analternative totaxonomicdescription
Relative abundance1.0
10–1
10–2
BS
LNLSGS10–3
10–4
10–5
Species rank30 20 10(a)
1.0
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
Species rank5 10 15(b)
DD
MF
RF
CM
DPRARelative abundance1.0
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
Species rank1949
1919
1903
1872 18621856(c)
Figure 16.5 (a, b) Rank–abundance
patterns of various models. Two are
statistically orientated (LS and LN), whilst the rest can be described as niche orientated. (a) BS, broken stick; 
GS, geometric series; LN, log-normal; LS, log series. (b) CM, composite; DD, dominance decay; DP, dominancepreemption; MF, MacArthur fraction; RA, random assortment; RF, randomfraction. (c) Change in the relativeabundance pattern (geometric series ﬁtted)of plant species in an experimentalgrassland subjected to continuous 
fertilizer from 1856 to 1949. ((a–c) afterTokeshi, 1993.)EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 473••474 CHAPTER 16
16.3 Community patterns in space
16.3.1 Gradient analysis
Figure 16.6 shows a variety of ways of describing the distribution
of vegetation used in a classic study in the Great Smoky Moun-tains (Tennessee), USA, where tree species give the vegetationits main character. Figure 16.6a shows the characteristic associ-ations of the dominant trees on the mountainside, drawn as if 
the communities had sharp boundaries. The mountainside itselfprovides a range of conditions for plant growth, and two of these,altitude and moisture, may be particularly important in determiningthe distribution of the various tree species. Figure 16.6b shows thedominant associations graphed in terms of these two environ-mental dimensions. Finally, Figure 16.6c shows the abundance ofeach individual tree species (expressed as a percentage of all treestems present) plotted against the single gradient of moisture.
Figure 16.6a is a subjective analysis
that acknowledges that the vegeta-
tion of particular areas differs in a characteristic way from that of otherareas. It could be taken to imply thatthe various communities are sharply
delimited. Figure 16.6b gives the same impression. Note that bothFigure 16.6a and b are based on descriptions of the vegetation.However, Figure 16.6c sharpens the focus by concentrating 
on the pattern of distribution of the individual species. It is then
immediately obvious that there is considerable overlap in theirabundance – there are no sharp boundaries. The various tree species are now revealed as being strung out along the gradientwith the tails of their distributions overlapping. The results of this ‘gradient analysis’ show that the limits of the distributions of each species ‘end not with a bang but with a whimper’. Manyother gradient studies have produced similar results.
Perhaps the major criticism of 
gradient analysis as a way of detect-
ing pattern in communities is that thechoice of the gradient is almost alwayssubjective. The investigator searchesfor some feature of the environment that appears to matter tothe organisms and then organizes the data about the species concerned along a gradient of that factor. It is not necessarily 
the most appropriate factor to have chosen. The fact that the species from a community can be arranged in a sequence alonga gradient of some environmental factor does not prove that this factor is the most important one. It may only imply that the factor chosen is more or less loosely correlated with what-ever really matters in the lives of the species involved. Gradientanalysis is only a small step on the way to the objective descrip-tion of communities.
••0.0010.010.1
Species rankRelative abundance1
0.0010.011
0.1
Species rank1.0
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
Species rankR. yezoensis
R. yezoensisS. emersum
S. emersumRelative abundance(d)
(e)
Day 2 Day 7 Day 15 Day 30 Day 60Figure 16.5 (cont’d ) (d) Comparison of
rank–abundance patterns for invertebrate
species living on a structurally complexstream plant Ranunculus yezoensis (
/H17009) and 
a simple plant Sparganium emersum (5);
ﬁtted lines represent the MacArthurfraction model ( , the upper one for R. yezoensis and the lower one for 
S. emersum ) and the random fraction model
( , the upper one for R. yezoensis
and the lower one for S. emersum ). (After
Taniguchi et al. , 2003.) (e) Rank–abundance
patterns (based on a biomass index) for
bacterial assemblages in lake bioﬁlms of different ages (symbols from left to right represent days 2, 7, 15, 30, 60). (After Jackson et al. , 2001.)
species distributions
along gradients endnot with a bang butwith a whimperchoice of gradient is almost alwayssubjectiveEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 474•• ••
Elevation (ft)(Boreal forests)
Flats
Draws
Ravines(b) 6000
5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500Mesic type Sedge type
Coves
CanyonsRidges
and
peaksOpen slopes
NE E W S N
NW SE SWSheltered
slopesBeech forests
Red oak–chestnut forest(Heath
bald)
White oak–chestnut forest
Grassy bald
Table
mountain
pine heath
Pitch
pine heath
Virginia
pine
forestCove forestsHemlock forest
Red oak–
pignut hickoryforest
Chestnut oak–chestnut
forest
Chestnut oak–chestnut
heathPercentage of stems1
130
145
Moisture level(c)
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
Sheltered slopes Valley
DryerDraws SW
WetterNE Open slopes2
3456
78
9
10 1112
1314
15161817Dryer Wetter(a)
HB
SF SFGB
WOC
ROC
H
HHPS
ROC ROC
OCH OCFOCF
OHOHCFBG
OCFOCF
OCHOCH
P
OHF
Figure 16.6 Three contrasting descriptions of distributions of the characteristic dominant tree species of the Great Smoky Mountains,
Tennessee. (a) Topographic distribution of vegetation types on an idealized west-facing mountain and valley. (b) Idealized grap hic
arrangement of vegetation types according to elevation and aspect. (c) Distributions of individual tree populations (percentage  of stems
present) along the moisture gradient. Vegetation types: BG, beech gap; CF, cove forest; F, Fraser ﬁr forest; GB, grassy bald; H , hemlock
forest; HB, heath bald; OCF, chestnut oak–chestnut forest; OCH, chestnut oak–chestnut heath; OH, oak–hickory; P, pine forest an d heath;
ROC, red oak–chestnut forest; S, spruce forest; SF, spruce–ﬁr forest; WOC, white oak–chestnut forest. Major species: 1, Halesia monticola ;
2, Aesculus octandra ; 3, Tilia heterophylla ; 4, Betula alleghaniensis ; 5, Liriodendron tulipifera ; 6, Tsuga canadensis ; 7, B. lenta ; 8, Acer rubrum ; 9,
Cornus ﬂorida ; 10, Carya alba ; 11, Hamamelis virginiana ; 12, Quercus montana ; 13, Q. alba ; 14, Oxydendrum arboreum ; 15, Pinus strobus ; 16, 
Q. coccinea ; 17, P. virginiana ; 18, P. rigida . (After Whittaker, 1956.)EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 475•• ••476 CHAPTER 16
B
C
CCCCF
GG
C
CCC
CBB
B
B
CBBE
BDC
A
CB
C
G
HN
0 100 km403836172 174 176 178(a)
(c)
50 60 100 70
Bray–Curtis similarity measure40 80 90(b)
FTP
GGHH
HHE
C
CCG CCC
C
CCBB BB
BB BA
CC
C
CCB
CDDO
pHLatitude
TemperatureLongitude
Mean depth
Secchi
Chlorophyll–2 –1 3 0Axis 2
–44
23
0
–3 1 2–2
–3–11
–2 –1 3 0Axis 2
Axis 1–44
23
0
–3 1 2–2
–3–11(d)
Conochilus unicornisF
Ascomorpha ovalis
Keratella tecta Keratella tropicaT. longiseta T. ousilla
H. intermedia
S. oblongaF. terminalis
C. dossuarius
C. unicornis
A. ovalis
C. coenobasis
P. dolichoptera
Collotheca sp.
A. fissaK. slackiK. tectaK. tropica
B. budapestinensis
B. calyciflorus
F. longisetaC
CCC
C
CCC
C
CCGGGBBB
BB
BB BH
DH
HH
CC CAE
CHGFEDCBAEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 476••THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 477
16.3.2 Classiﬁcation and ordination of communities
Formal statistical techniques have been deﬁned to take the sub-
jectivity out of community description. These techniques allowthe data from community studies to sort themselves, without theinvestigator putting in any preconceived ideas about which speciestend to be associated with each other or which environmental
variables correlate most strongly with the species distributions.One such technique is classiﬁcation .
Classiﬁcation begins with the assump-
tion that communities consist of relativelydiscrete entities. It produces groups ofrelated communities by a process con-ceptually similar to taxonomic classiﬁca-tion. In taxonomy, similar individuals are
grouped together in species, similar species in genera, and so on.
In community classiﬁcation, communities with similar species com-positions are grouped together in subsets, and similar subsets maybe further combined if desired (see Ter Braak & Prentice, 1988,for details of the procedure).
The rotifer communities of a number of lakes in the North
Island of New Zealand (Figure 16.7a) were subjected to a classi-ﬁcation technique called cluster analysis (Duggan et al., 2002). Eight
clusters or classes were identiﬁed (Figure 16.7b), each based solelyon the arrays of species present and their abundances. The spatialdistribution of each class of rotifer community in the New Zealandlakes is shown in Figure 16.7a. Note that there is little consistentspatial relationship; communities in each class are dotted aboutthe island. This illustrates one of the strengths of classiﬁcation.
Classiﬁcation methods show the structure within a series of com-munities without the necessity of picking out some supposedlyrelevant environmental variable in advance, a procedure that isnecessary for gradient analysis.
Ordination is a mathematical treat-
ment that allows communities to beorganized on a graph so that those that are most similar in both speciescomposition and relative abundancewill appear closest together, whilstcommunities that differ greatly in the relative importance of a similar set ofspecies, or that possess quite different
species, appear far apart. Figure 16.7c shows the application of anordination technique called canonical correspondence analysis(CCA) to the rotifer communities (Ter Braak & Smilauer 1998).
CCA also allows the community patterns to be examined in termsof environmental variables. Obviously, the success of the methodnow depends on having sampled an appropriate variety of environ-mental variables. This is a major snag in the procedure – we maynot have measured the qualities in the environment that are mostrelevant. The relationships between rotifer community com-
position and a variety of physicochemical factors are shown in
Figure 16.7c. The link between classiﬁcation and ordination canbe gauged by noting that communities falling into classes A–H,derived from classiﬁcation, are also fairly distinctly separated onthe CCA ordination graph.
Community classes A and B tend 
to be associated with high water trans-parency (‘Secchi depth’), whereas those
in classes G and H are associated withhigh total phosphorus and chlorophyllconcentrations; the other lake classes take up intermediate posi-tions. Lakes that have been subject to a greater level of runoff of agricultural fertilizers or input of sewage are described aseutrophic. These tend to have high phosphorus concentrations,leading to higher chlorophyll levels and lower transparency (agreater abundance of phytoplankton cells). Evidently, the rotifercommunities are strongly inﬂuenced by the level of eutrophica-tion to which the lakes are subject. Species of rotifer that are characteristic of particularly eutrophic conditions, such as Keratella
tecta and K. tropica (Figure 16.7d), were strongly represented in
classes G and H, while those associated with more pristine con-ditions, such as Conochilus unicornis and Ascomorpha ovalis , were
common in classes A and B.
The level of eutrophication, however, is not the only signi-
ﬁcant factor in explaining rotifer community composition. Class
C communities, for example, while characteristic of intermediate
phosphorus concentrations, can be differentiated along axis 2according to dissolved oxygen concentration and lake temper-ature (themselves negatively related because oxygen solubilitydeclines with increasing temperature).
What do these results tell us? First,
and most speciﬁcally, the correlations
with environmental factors, revealedby the analysis, give us some speciﬁc
hypotheses to test about the relationshipbetween community composition and underlying environmentalfactors. (Remember that correlation does not necessarily imply
••classiﬁcation involves
grouping similarcommunitiestogether in clusters
subsequently, it isnecessary to ask whatvaries along the axesof the graph
ordination cangenerate hypothesesfor subsequenttestingin ordination,communities aredisplayed on a graph so that thosemost similar incomposition areclosest together
Figure 16.7 (opposite ) (a) Thirty-one lakes in the North Island of New Zealand where rotifer communities (78 species in total) were
sampled and described. (b) Results of cluster analysis (classiﬁcation) on species composition data from the 31 lakes (based on the
Bray–Curtis similarity measure); lake communities that are most similar cluster together and eight clusters are identiﬁed (A–H) . 
(c) Results of canonical correspondence analysis (ordination). The positions in ordination space are shown for lake sites (show n as letters
A–H corresponding to their classiﬁcation), individual rotifer species (orange arrows in top panel) and environmental factors (o range arrows
in lower panel). (d) Silhouettes of four of the rotifer species. (After Duggan et al. , 2002.)EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 477478 CHAPTER 16
causation. For example, dissolved oxygen and community com-
position may vary together because of a common response toanother environmental factor. A direct causal link can only beproved by controlled experimentation.)
A second, more general point is relevant to the discussion 
of the nature of the community. The results emphasize that
under a particular set of environmental conditions, a predictableassociation of species is likely to occur. It shows that communityecologists have more than just a totally arbitrary and ill-deﬁnedset of species to study.
16.3.3 Problems of boundaries in community ecology
There may be communities that are
separated by clear, sharp boundaries,where groups of species lie adjacent to,but do not intergrade into, each other.If they exist, they are exceptional. The
meeting of terrestrial and aquatic environments might appear to be
a sharp boundary but its ecological unreality is emphasized by theotters or frogs that regularly cross it and the many aquatic insectsthat spend their larval lives in the water but their adult lives aswinged stages on land or in the air. On land, quite sharp boundariesoccur between the vegetation types on acidic and basic rocks whereoutcrops meet, or where serpentine (a term applied to a mineralrich in magnesium silicate) and nonserpentine rocks are juxtaposed.However, even in such situations, minerals are leached across 
the boundaries, which become increasingly blurred. The safest statement we can make about community boundaries is pro-bably that they do not exist, but that some communities are muchmore sharply deﬁned than others. The ecologist is usually better employed looking at the ways in which communities grade intoeach other, than in searching for sharp cartographic boundaries.
In the ﬁrst quarter of the 20th 
century there was considerable debateabout the nature of the community.Clements (1916) conceived of the community as a sort of superorganism
whose member species were tightly bound together both nowand in their common evolutionary history. Thus, individuals, 
populations and communities bore a relationship to each otherresembling that between cells, tissues and organisms.
In contrast, the individualistic concept devised by Gleason
(1926) and others saw the relationship of coexisting species as simply the results of similarities in their requirements and toler-ances (and partly the result of chance). Taking this view, com-munity boundaries need not be sharp, and associations of specieswould be much less predictable than one would expect from thesuperorganism concept.
The current view is close to the individualistic concept. Results
of direct gradient analysis, ordination and classiﬁcation all indicatethat a given location, by virtue mainly of its physical characteristics,
possesses a reasonably predictable association of species. How-ever, a given species that occurs in one predictable association is also quite likely to occur with another group of species underdifferent conditions elsewhere.
A further point needs to be born in mind when considering
the question of environmental patchiness and boundaries. Spatialheterogeneity in the distribution of communities can be viewedwithin a series of nested scales. Figure 16.8, for example, shows
patterns in spatial heterogeneity in communities of soil organismsoperating at scales from hectares to square millimeters (Ettema& Wardle, 2002). At the largest scale, these reﬂect patterns in envir-onmental factors related to topography and the distribution of different plant communities. But at the other extreme, ﬁne-scalepatterns may be present as a result of the location of individualplant roots or local soil structure. The boundaries of patterns atthese various scale are also likely to be blurred.
Whether or not communities have
more or less clear boundaries is animportant question, but it is not the fundamental consideration. Community
ecology is the study of the community level of organization rather
than of a spatially and temporally deﬁnable unit. It is concernedwith the structure and activities of the multispecies assemblage,usually at one point in space and time. It is not necessary to havediscrete boundaries between communities to study communityecology.
16.4 Community patterns in time
Just as the relative importance of species varies in space, so their
patterns of abundance may change with time. In either case, a
•• ••are communities
discrete entities withsharp boundaries?
the community: not so much asuperorganism . . .
. . . more a level of organizationFine-scale effects of
roots, organic particlesand soil structure
Plot-scale to field-scale
effects of burrowinganimals, individualplants and plantcommunities
Large-scale gradients
of texture, soil carbon,topography andvegetation systems
Figure 16.8 Determinants of spatial heterogeneity of communities 
of soil organisms including bacteria, fungi, nematodes, mites and
collembolans. (After Ettema & Wardle, 2002.)EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 478THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 479
species will occur only where and when: (i) it is capable of reach-
ing a location; (ii) appropriate conditions and resources exist there;and (iii) competitors, predators and parasites do not preclude it.A temporal sequence in the appearance and disappearance of speciestherefore seems to require that conditions, resources and/or the
inﬂuence of enemies themselves vary with time.
For many organisms, and particularly short-lived ones, their
relative importance in the community changes with time of yearas the individuals act out their life cycles against a background of seasonal change. Sometimes community composition shiftsbecause of externally driven physical change, such as the build upof silt in a coastal salt marsh leading to its replacement by forest.In other cases, temporal patterns are simply a reﬂection of changesin key resources, as in the sequence of heterotrophic organisms
associated with fecal deposits or dead bodies as they decompose(see Figure 11.2). The explanation for such temporal patterns isrelatively straightforward and will not concern us here. Nor willwe dwell on the variations in abundance of species in a commun-ity from year to year as individual populations respond to a multitude of factors that inﬂuence their reproduction and survival(dealt with in Chapters 5, 6 and 8–14).
Our focus will be on patterns of community change that 
follow a disturbance, deﬁned as a relatively discrete event thatremoves organisms (Townsend & Hildrew, 1994) or otherwisedisrupts the community by inﬂuencing the availability of spaceor food resources, or by changing the physical environment(Pickett & White, 1985). Such disturbances are common in all 
kinds of community. In forests, they may be caused by high winds, lightning, earthquakes, elephants, lumberjacks or simplyby the death of a tree through disease or old age. Agents of dis-turbance in grassland include frost, burrowing animals and theteeth, feet, dung or dead bodies of grazers. On rocky shores or coral reefs, disturbances may result from severe wave action during hurricanes, tidal waves, battering by logs or moored boatsor the ﬁns of careless scuba divers.
16.4.1 Founder-controlled and dominance-controlled
communities
In response to disturbances, we can
postulate two fundamentally differentkinds of community response accordingto the type of competitive relationshipsexhibited by the component species 
– founder controlled and dominance controlled (Yodzis, 1986).
Founder-controlled communities will occur if a large number of species
are approximately equivalent in their ability to colonize an open-ing left by a disturbance, are equally well ﬁtted to the abiotic envir-onment and can hold the location until they die. In this case, theresult of the disturbance is essentially a lottery. The winner is thespecies that happens to reach and establish itself in the disturbedlocation ﬁrst. The dynamics of founder-controlled communities
are discussed in Section 16.7.4.
Dominance-controlled communities
are those where some species are com-petitively superior to others so that aninitial colonizer of an opening left by a disturbance cannot necessarily main-tain its presence there. In these cases,disturbances lead to reasonably predictable sequences of speciesbecause different species have different strategies for exploitingresources – early species are good colonizers and fast growers,whereas later species can tolerate lower resource levels andgrow to maturity in the presence of early species, eventually out-competing them. These situations are more commonly knownby the term ecological succession , deﬁned as the nonseasonal ,
directional and continuous pattern of colonization and extinction on a
site by species populations .
16.4.2 Primary and secondary successions
Our focus is on successional patterns that
occur on newly exposed landforms. Ifthe exposed landform has not previouslybeen inﬂuenced by a community, thesequence of species is referred to as a
primary succession. Lava ﬂows and pumice plains caused by volcanic eruptions (see Section 16.4.3), craters caused by the impactof meteors (Cockell & Lee, 2002), substrate exposed by the retreatof a glacier (Crocker & Major, 1955) and freshly formed sand dunes(see Section 16.4.4) are examples. In cases where the vegetationof an area has been partially or completely removed, but wherewell-developed soil and seeds and spores remain, the subsequentsequence of species is termed a secondary succession. The lossof trees locally as a result of disease, high winds, ﬁre or felling
may lead to secondary successions, as can cultivation followedby the abandonment of farmland (so-called old ﬁeld successions– see Section 16.4.5).
Successions on newly exposed land-
forms typically take several hundreds of years to run their course. However,a precisely analagous process occursamongst the animals and algae onrecently denuded rock walls in the marine subtidal zone, and this succession takes only a decade or so (Hill et al. , 2002). The
research life of an ecologist is sufﬁcient to encompass a subtidalsuccession but not that following glacial retreat. Fortunately,however, information can sometimes be gained over the longer
timescale. Often, successional stages in time are represented bycommunity gradients in space. The use of historic maps, carbondating or other techniques may enable the age of a communitysince exposure of the landform to be estimated. A series of 
•• ••founder control:
many species areequivalent in theirability to colonizedominance control:some potentialcolonizers arecompetitivelydominant
primary succession:an exposed landformuninﬂuenced by aprevious community
secondary succession:vestiges of a previouscommunity are stillpresentEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 479480 CHAPTER 16
communities currently in existence, but corresponding to different
lengths of time since the onset of succession, can be inferred toreﬂect succession. However, whether or not different communitiesthat are spread out in space really do represent various stages ofsuccession must be judged with caution. We must remember, for
example, that in northern temperate areas the vegetation we seemay still be undergoing recolonization and responding to climaticchange following the last ice age (see Chapter 1).
16.4.3 Primary succession on volcanic lava
A primary succession on basaltic volcanic
ﬂows on Miyake-jima Island, Japan,was inferred from a known chrono-sequence (16, 37, 125 and >800 years old)
(Figure 16.9a). In the 16-year-old ﬂow,
soil was very sparse and lacking innitrogen; vegetation was absent except for a few small alder trees ( Alnus sieboldiana ). In the older plots, 113 taxa were recorded,
including ferns, herbaceous perennials, lianas and trees. Of mostsigniﬁcance in this primary succession were: (i) the successful colonization of the bare lava by the nitrogen-ﬁxing alder; (ii) thefacilitation (through improved nitrogen availability) of mid-successional Prunus speciosa and the late successional evergreen
tree Machilus thunbergii ; (iii) the formation of a mixed forest and the
shading out of Alnus and Prunus ; and (iv) ﬁnally, the replacement
of Machilus by the longer lived Castanopsis sieboldii (Figure 16.9b).
16.4.4 Primary succession on coastal sand dunes
An extensive chronosequence of dune-
capped beach ridges has been under-taken on the coast of Lake Michigan in the USA. Thirteen ridges of known
•• ••Bare
land0-
year-old16-
year-old
Alnus
shrub37-
year-old
Machilus  and
Prunus  forest125-
year-old
Colonization of Alnus
and ReynoutriaFacilitation by N fixation of Alnus
Colonization of Prunus  and Machilus
Rapid above-ground biomass
accumulationCastanopsis
forest800-
year-old
Disappearance of Alnus  and Prunus
Colonization of Castanopsis(b)(a)
0 2 km16-year-old
lava flow
700
600
500
400
300
200
100125-year-old lava flow
37-year-old
lava flowNfacilitation: early
successional specieson volcanic lava pavethe way for later onesimportance of seedavailability ratherthan facilitation insand dune succession
Figure 16.9 (a) Vegetation was 
described on 16-, 37- and 125-year-old 
lava ﬂows on Miyake-jima Island, Japan.Analysis of the 16-year-old ﬂow wasnonquantitative (no sample sites shown).
Sample sites on the other ﬂows are shownas solid circles. Sites outside the three ﬂows are at least 800 years old. (b) Themain features of the primary succession in relation to lava age. (After Kamijo et al. , 2002.)EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 480THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 481
age (30 – 440 years old) show a clear pattern of primary succession
to forest (Lichter, 2000). The dune grass Ammophila breviligulata
dominates the youngest, still mobile dune ridge, but shrubby Prunus
pumila and Salix spp. are also present. Within 100 years, these are
replaced by evergreen shrubs such as Juniperus communis and 
by prairie bunch grass Schizachrium scoparium. Conifers such as
Pinus spp., Larix laricina , Picea strobus and Thuja occidentalis begin
colonizing the dune ridges after 150 years, and a mixed forest of
Pinus strobus and P. resinosa develops between 225 and 400 years.
Deciduous trees such as the oak Quercus rubra and the maple 
Acer rubrum do not become important components of the forest
until 440 years.It used to be thought that early successional dune species 
facilitated the later species by adding organic matter to the soil
and increasing the availability of soil moisture and nitrogen (as in the volcanic primary succession). However, experimentalseed addition and seedling transplant experiments have shown 
that later species are capable of germinating in young dunes(Figure 16.10a). While the more developed soil of older dunes may improve the performance of late successional species, theirsuccessful colonization of young dunes is mainly constrained bylimited seed dispersal, together with seed predation by rodents(Figure 16.10b). Ammophila generally colonizes young, active dunes
through horizontal vegetative growth. Schizachrium , one of the
•• ••Figure 16.10 (a) Seedling emergence
(means +SE) from added seeds of species
typical of different successional stages on
dunes of four ages. (b) Seedling emergenceof the four species ( Ab, Ammophila
breviligulata , Ss, Schizachrium scoparium , 
Ps, Pinus strobus , Pr, Pinus resinosa ) in the
presence and absence of rodent predators
of seeds (After Lichter, 2000.)
Seedling emergence (proportion of viable seed)
400 150 3000.5
60
Dune age (years)(a)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1Seedling emergence (proportion of viable seed)
Pr Ab00.5
Ps
Species(b)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
SsAmmophila
Schizachrium
Pinus strobus
Pinus resinosa
Seed predation
No predation
P < 0.0001EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 481482 CHAPTER 16
dominants of open dunes before forest development, has rates of
germination and seedling establishment that are no better thanPinus , but its seeds are not preyed upon. Also, Schizachrium has
the advantage of quickly reaching maturity and can continue toprovide seeds at a high rate. These early species are eventually
competitively excluded as trees establish and grow. Lichter (2000)considers that dune succession is better described in terms of thetransient dynamics of colonization and competitive displacement,rather than the result of facilitation by early species (improvingsoil conditions) followed by competitive displacement.
16.4.5 Secondary successions in abandoned ﬁelds
Successions on old ﬁelds have been
studied particularly along the easternpart of the USA where many farmswere abandoned by farmers who
moved west after the frontier was opened up in the 19th century
(Tilman, 1987, 1988). Most of the precolonial mixed conifer–hardwood forest had been destroyed, but regeneration wasswift. In many places, a series of sites that were abandoned for different, recorded periods of time are available for study. The typical sequence of dominant vegetation is: annual weeds,herbaceous perennials, shrubs, early successional trees and latesuccessional trees.
Old-ﬁeld succession has also been
studied in the productive Loess Plateau
in China, which for millennia has beenaffected by human activities so that few
areas of natural vegetation remain. The Chinese government haslaunched some conservation projects focused on the recovery of damaged ecosystems. A big question mark is whether the climax vegetation of the Plateau will prove to be grasslandsteppe or forest. Wang (2002) studied the vegetation at four plotsabandoned by farmers for known periods of time (3, 26, 46 and149 years). He was able to age some of his plots in an unusualmanner. Graveyards in China are sacred and human activities are prohibited in their vicinity – gravestone records indicated how long ago the older areas had been taken out of agriculturalproduction. Of a total of 40 plant species identiﬁed, several were
considered dominant at the four successional stages (in terms ofrelative abundance and relative ground cover). In the ﬁrst stage(recently abandoned farmland) Artemesia scoparia and Seraria
viridis were most characteristic, at 26 years Lespedeza davurica
and S. viridis dominated, at 46 years Stipa bungeana , Bothriochloa
ischaemun , A. gmelinii and L. davurica were most important, 
while at 149 years B. ischaemun and A. gmelinii were dominant
(Figure 16.11). The early successional species were annuals andbiennials with high seed production. By 26 years, the perennialherb L. davurica , with its ability to spread laterally by vegetative
means and a well-developed root system, had replaced A. scoparia .The 46-year-old plot was characterized by the highest species 
richness and diverse life history strategies, dominated by peren-nial lifestyles. The dominance of B. ischaemun at 149 years was
related to its perennial nature, ability to spread clonally and highcompetitive ability. As in Tilman’s (1987, 1988) North Americanstudies, soil nitrogen content increased during the successionand may have facilitated some species in the succession. Wang
concludes that the grass B. ischaemun is the characteristic climax
species in this Loess Plateau habitat, and thus the vegetation seemslikely to succeed to steppe grassland rather than forest.
16.5 Species replacement probabilities 
during successions
A model of succession developed by
Horn (1981) sheds some light on the suc-cessional process. Horn recognizedthat in a hypothetical forest communityit would be possible to predict changes
in tree species composition given twothings. First, one would need to knowfor each tree species the probability that, within a particular timeinterval, an individual would be replaced by another of the samespecies or of a different species. Second, an initial species com-position would have to be assumed.
Horn considered that the proportional representation of 
various species of saplings established beneath an adult treereﬂected the probability of an individual tree’s replacement by 
each of those species. Using this information, he estimated the pro-bability, after 50 years, that a site now occupied by a given specieswill be taken over by another species or will still be occupied by
•• ••abandoned old ﬁelds:
succession to forestin North America . . .
forest succession can be representedas a tree-by-treereplacement model . . .. . . but to grasslandin China
Importance value
00.7
Successional stages0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
149 46 26 3Artemesia scoparia
Lespedeza davurica
Artemesia gmeliniiSeraria viridis
Stipa bungeana
Bothriochloa ischaemun
Figure 16.11 Variation in the relative importance of six species
during an old-ﬁeld succession on the Loess Plateau in China. 
(After Wang, 2002.)EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 482THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 483
the same species (Table 16.1). Thus, for example, there is a 5%
chance that a location now occupied by grey birch will still support grey birch in 50 years’ time, whereas there is a 36% chancethat blackgum will take over, a 50% chance for red maple and9% for beech.
Beginning with an observed distribution of the canopy species
in a stand in New Jersey in the USA known to be 25 years old,
Horn modeled the changes in species composition over severalcenturies. The process is illustrated in simpliﬁed form in Table 16.2(which deals with only four species out of those present). Theprogress of this hypothetical succession allows several predic-tions to be made. Red maple should dominate quickly, whilst greybirch disappears. Beech should slowly increase to predominate later, with blackgum and red maple persisting at low abundance.
All these predictions are borne out by what happens in the realsuccession (ﬁnal column).
The most interesting feature of
Horn’s so-called Markov chain model isthat, given enough time, it converges ona stationary, stable composition that isindependent of the initial compositionof the forest. The outcome is inevit-able (it depends only on the matrix 
of replacement probabilities) and will be achieved whether thestarting point is 100% grey birch or 100% beech, 50% blackgumand 50% red maple, or any other combination (as long as adjacentareas provide a source of seeds of species not initially present).
Korotkov et al. (2001) have used a similar Markov modeling
approach to predict the time it should take to reach the climax statefrom any other stage in old-ﬁeld successions culminating in mixedconifer–broadleaf forest in central Russia. From ﬁeld abandon-ment to climax is predicted to take 480–540 years, whereas a mid-successional stage of birch forest with spruce undergrowthshould take 320–370 years to reach the climax.
Since Markov models seem to be capable of generating 
quite accurate predictions, they may prove to be a useful tool informulating plans for forest management. However, the modelsare simplistic and the assumption that transition probabilities
remain constant in space and over time and are not affected by historic factors, such as initial biotic conditions and the order of arrival of species, are likely to be wrong in many cases(Facelli & Pickett, 1990). Hill et al. (2002) addressed the question
of spatiotemporal variation in species replacement probabil-ities in a subtidal community succession including sponges, 
sea anenomes, polychaetes and encrusting algae. In this case, 
the predicted successions and endpoints were similar whetherreplacement probabilities were averaged or were subject to real-istic spatial or temporal variation. And the outcomes of all threemodels were very similar to the observed community structure(Figure 16.12).
16.6 Biological mechanisms underlying
successions
Despite the advantages of simple
Markov models, a theory of successionshould ideally not only predict but alsoexplain. To do this, we need to considerthe biological basis for the replacement values in the model, and
here we have to turn to alternative approaches.
16.6.1 Competition–colonization trade-off and
successional niche mechanisms
Rees et al. (2001) drew together a
diversity of experimental, comparativeand theoretical approaches to producesome generalizations about vegetationdynamics. Early successional plants have a series of correlated 
traits, including high fecundity, effective dispersal, rapid growthwhen resources are abundant, and poor growth and survivalwhen resources are scarce. Late successional species usually have the opposite traits, including an ability to grow, survive andcompete when resources are scarce. In the absence of disturbance,
•• ••. . . that predicts a
stable speciescomposition and the time taken toreach itan ideal theory ofsuccession shouldpredict and explain
a trade-off betweencolonization andcompetitive ability?Table 16.1 A 50-year tree-by-tree transition matrix from Horn
(1981). The table shows the probability of replacement of one
individual by another of the same or different species 50 yearshence.
Occupant 50 years hence
Present occupant Grey birch Blackgum Red maple Beech
Grey birch 0.05 0.36 0.50 0.09
Blackgum 0.01 0.57 0.25 0.17Red maple 0.0 0.14 0.55 0.31Beech 0.0 0.01 0.03 0.96Table 16.2 The predicted percentage composition of a forest
consisting initially of 100% grey birch. (After Horn, 1981.)
Age of forest (years)
Species 0 50 100 150 200 ∞ Data from old forest
Grey birch 100 5 1 0 0 0 0Blackgum 0 36 29 23 18 5 3Red maple 0 50 39 30 24 9 4Beech 0 9 31 47 58 86 93EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 483•• ••484 CHAPTER 16
late successional species eventually outcompete early species,
because they reduce resources beneath the levels required by theearly successional species. Early species persist for two reasons:(i) because their dispersal ability and high fecundity permitsthem to colonize and establish in recently disturbed sites before
late successional species can arrive; or (ii) because rapid growthunder resource-rich conditions allows them to temporarily out-compete late successional species even if they arrive at the sametime. Rees and his colleagues refer to the ﬁrst mechanism as acompetition–colonization trade-off and the second as the successional
niche (early conditions suit early species because of their niche
requirements). The competition–colonization trade-off is streng-thened by a further physiological inevitability. Huge differencesin per capita seed production among plant species are inversely
correlated to equally large variations in seed size; plants produc-ing tiny seeds tend to produce many more of them than plantsproducing large seeds (see Section 4.8.5). Thus, Rees et al. (2001)
point out that small-seeded species are good colonists (manypropagules) but poor competitors (small seed food reserves), andvice versa for large-seeded species.
16.6.2 Facilitation
Cases of competition–colonization trade-
offs and/ or successional niche relationsare prominent in virtually every succes-sion that has been described, includingall those in the previous section. In
addition, we have seen cases where early species may change the abiotic environment in ways (e.g. increased soil nitrogen) that make it easier for later species to establish and thrive. Thus, facilitation has to be added to the list of phenomena under-
lying some successions. We cannot say how common this stateof affairs is. However, the converse is by no means uncommon;thus, many plant species alter the environment in a way that makes it more, rather than less, suitable for themselves (Wilson& Agnew, 1992). Thus, for example, woody vegetation can trap
water from fog or ameliorate frosts, improving the conditions for growth of the species concerned, whilst grassy swards can intercept surface ﬂowing water and grow better in the moistersoil that is created.Abundance (fraction of patches occupied)
30000.04
10(a)
0.02
20Abundance (fraction of patches occupied)
30000.04
10(b)
0.02
20Abundance (fraction of patches occupied)
30000.04
10
Time (years)(c)
0.02
20Figure 16.12 (left) Simulated recovery dynamics (Markov 
chain models) of three of the species that make up a subtidal
community starting from 100% bare rock for spatially varying,time varying or homogeneous replacement probabilities: (a) thebryozoan Crisia eburnea , (b) the sea anenome Metridium senile and
(c) encrusting coralline algae. The points at the end of each plot
(±95% conﬁdence intervals) are the observed abundances at a sitein the Gulf of Maine, USA. (After Hill et al. , 2002.)the importance of
facilitation – but not alwaysEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 484••THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 485
16.6.3 Interactions with enemies
Rees et al. (2001) point out that it fol-
lows from the competition–coloniza-
tion trade-off that recruitment ofcompetitively dominant plants should be
determined largely by the rate of arrival of their seeds. This
means that herbivores that reduce seed production are more likelyto reduce the density of dominant competitors than of subordi-nates. Recall that this is just what happened in the sand-dune studydescribed in Section 16.4.4. In a similar vein, Carson and Root(1999) showed that by removing insect predators of seeds, themeadow goldenrod ( Solidago altissima ), which normally appears
about 5 years into an old-ﬁeld succession, became dominantafter only 3 years. This happened because release from seed pre-dation allowed it to outcompete earlier colonists more quickly.
Thus, apart from competition–colonization trade-off, succes-
sional niche and facilitation, we have to add a fourth mechanism
– interactions with enemies – if we are to fully understand plantsuccessions. Experimental approaches, such as that employed tounderstand the role of seed predators, have also shown that thenature of soil food webs (Gange & Brown, 2002), the presenceand disturbance of litter (Ganade & Brown, 2002), and the pres-ence of mammals that consume vegetation (Cadenasso et al. , 2002)
sometimes play roles in determining successional sequences.
16.6.4 Resource-ratio hypothesis
A further example of a successional
niche being responsible for speciesreplacement is worth highlighting.Trembling aspen ( Populus tremuloides ) 
is a tree that appears earlier in succes-
sions in North America than northern
red oak ( Quercus rubra ) or sugar maple ( Acer saccharum ). Kaelke
et al. (2001) compared the growth of seedlings of all three species
when planted along a gradient of light availability ranging fromforest understory (2.6% of full light) to small clearings (69% of full light). The aspen outgrew the others when relative lightavailability exceeded 5%. However, there was a rank reversal inrelative growth rate in deep shade; here the oak and maple, typicalof later stages of succession, grew more strongly and survived 
better than aspen (Figure 16.13). In his resource-ratio hypothesis
of succession, Tilman (1988) places strong emphasis on the roleof changing relative competitive abilities of plant species as con-ditions slowly change with time. He hypothesized that species dominance at any point in a terrestrial succession is strongly inﬂu-enced by the relative availability of two resources: not just by light(as demonstrated by Kaelke et al. , 2001) but also by a limiting soil
nutrient (often nitrogen). Early in succession, the habitat experi-enced by seedlings has low nutrient but high light availability. Asa result of litter input and the activities of decomposer organisms,
nutrient availability increases with time – this can be expected to be particularly marked in primary successions that begin witha very poor soil (or no soil at all). But total plant biomass alsoincreases with time and, in consequence, light penetration to thesoil surface decreases. Tilman’s ideas are illustrated in Figure 16.14for ﬁve hypothetical species. Species A has the lowest requirement
for the nutrient and the highest requirement for light at the soil
surface. It has a short, prostrate growth form. Species E, whichis the superior competitor in high-nutrient, low-light habitats, hasthe lowest requirement for light and the highest for the nutrient.It is a tall, erect species. Species B, C and D are intermediate in their requirements and each reaches its peak abundance at a different point along the soil nutrient–light gradient. There is scope for further experimental testing of Tilman’s hypothesis.
16.6.5 Vital attributes
Noble and Slatyer (1981) were also
interested in deﬁning the qualities thatdetermine the place of a species in a succession. They called these propertiesvital attributes . The two most important
relate to: (i) the method of recovery after
••an important role for
seed predation?
Tilman’s resource-ratio hypothesisemphasizes changingcompetitive abilities
beyond justcompetitive ability:Noble and Slatyer’s‘vital attributes’Relative growth rate (mg g–1 day–1)
25–20060
5
Integrated PPFD (mol m–2 day–1)40
20
0
10 15 20
Figure 16.13 Relative growth rate (during the July–August 1994
growing season) of trembling aspen ( 9), northern red oak ( /H17033) and
sugar maple ( 4) in relation to photosynthetic photon ﬂux density
(PPFD). (After Kaelke et al. , 2001.)EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 485486 CHAPTER 16
disturbance (four classes are deﬁned: vegetative spread, V;
seedling pulse from a seed bank, S; seedling pulse from abundantdispersal from the surrounding area, D; no special mechanism withjust moderate dispersal from only a small seed bank, N); and (ii)the ability of individuals to reproduce in the face of competition
(deﬁned in terms of tolerance T at one extreme and intoleranceI at the other). Thus, for example, a species may be classed as SI if disturbance releases a seedling pulse from a seed bank, andif the plants are intolerant of competition (being unable to germinate or grow in competition with older or more advancedindividuals of either their own or another species). Seedlings ofsuch a species could establish themselves only immediately aftera disturbance, when competitors are rare. Of course, a seedlingpulse ﬁts well with such a pioneer existence. An example is the
annual Ambrosia artemisiifolia which often ﬁgures early in old-ﬁeld
successions. In contrast, the American beech ( Fagus grandifolia ) could
be classed as VT (being able to regenerate vegetatively from rootstumps, and tolerant of competition since it is able to establishitself and reproduce in competition with older or more advancedindividuals of either its own or another species) or NT (if no stumpsremain, it would invade slowly via seed dispersal). In either case,it would eventually displace other species and form part of the‘climax’ vegetation. Noble and Slatyer argue that it should be pos-
sible to classify all the species in an area according to these twovital attributes (to which relative longevity might be added as a third). Given this information, quite precise predictions aboutsuccessional sequences should be possible.
Lightning-induced ﬁres produce regular and natural disturbances
in many ecosystems in arid parts of the world and two ﬁre-response
syndromes, analogous to two of Noble and Slatyer’s disturbancerecovery classes, can be identiﬁed. Resprouters have massive, deeply penetrating root systems, and survive ﬁres as individuals,whereas reseeders are killed by the ﬁre but re-establish throughheat-stimulated germination and growth of seedlings (Bell, 2001).The proportion of species that can be classiﬁed as resprouters ishigher in forest and shrubland vegetation of southwest WesternAustralia (Mediterranean-type climate) than in more arid areas of the continent. Bell suggests that this is because the WesternAustralian communities have been subject to more frequent ﬁres than other areas, conforming to the hypothesis that short
intervals between ﬁres (averaging 20 years or less in many areasof Western Australia) promote the success of resprouters. Longerintervals between ﬁres, on the other hand, allow fuel loads to buildup so that ﬁres are more intense, killing resprouters and favoringthe reseeding strategy.
The consideration of vital attributes
from an evolutionary point of view sug-gests that certain attributes are likely tooccur together more often than by chance. We can envisage 
two alternatives that might increase the ﬁtness of an organism in a succession (Harper, 1977), either: (i) the species reacts to thecompetitive selection pressures and evolves characteristics thatenable it to persist longer in the succession, i.e. it responds to Kselection; or (ii) it may develop more efﬁcient mechanisms of
escape from the succession, and discover and colonize suitableearly stages of succession elsewhere, i.e. it responds to rselection
(see Section 4.12). Thus, from an evolutionary point of view, 
good colonizers can be expected to be poor competitors and viceversa. This is evident in Table 16.3, which lists some physio-logical characteristics that tend to go together in early and latesuccessional plants.
16.6.6 The role of animals in successions
The structure of communities and the
successions within them have mostoften been treated as essentially botan-ical matters. There are obvious reasonsfor this. Plants commonly provide
most of the biomass and the physical structure of communities;moreover, plants do not hide or run away and this makes it rather easy to assemble species lists, determine abundances anddetect change. The massive contribution that plants make to 
•• ••Relative abundanceC
4 0 1
Time
Nutrient or light availability
2 3B AD E
NutrientLight
Figure 16.14 Tilman’s (1988) resource-ratio hypothesis of
succession. Five hypothetical plant species are assumed to be
differentiated in their requirements for a limiting soil nutrient andlight. During the succession, the habitat starts with a nutrient-poorsoil but high light availability, changing gradually into a habitat
with a rich soil but low availability of light at the soil surface.Relative competitive abilities change as conditions vary, and ﬁrstone species and then another comes to dominate.rand Kspecies and
succession
necromass and the
late successional role of treesEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 486THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 487
determining the character of a community is not just a measure
of their role as the primary producers, it is also a result of theirslowness to decompose. The plant population not only contributesbiomass to the community, but is also a major contributor of necromass. Thus, unless microbial and detritivore activity is fast,
dead plant material accumulates as leaf litter or as peat. More-
over, the dominance of trees in so many communities comes about because they accumulate dead material; the greater part of a tree’s trunk and branches is dead. The tendency in many habitats for shrubs and trees to succeed herbaceous vegetationcomes largely from their ability to hold leaf canopies (and rootsystems) on an extending skeleton of predominantly dead supporttissue (the heart wood).
Animal bodies decompose much
more quickly, but there are situations
where animal remains, like those ofplants, can determine the structureand succession of a community. Thishappens when the animal skeleton
resists decomposition, as is the case in the accumulation ofcalciﬁed skeletons during the growth of corals. A coral reef, like a forest or a peat bog, gains its structure, and drives its successions, by accumulating its dead past. Reef-forming corals,like forest trees, gain their dominance in their respective com-munities by holding their assimilating parts progressively higheron predominantly dead support. In both cases, the organisms have an almost overwhelming effect on the abiotic environ-
ment, and they ‘control’ the lives of other organisms within it.The coral reef community (dominated by an animal, albeit onewith a plant symbiont) is as structured, diverse and dynamic as
a tropical rainforest.
The fact that plants dominate most of the structure and 
succession of communities does not mean that animals alwaysfollow the communities that plants dictate. This will often be 
the case, of course, because the plants provide the starting point for all food webs and determine much of the character of the physical environment in which animals live. But it is also some-times the animals that determine the nature of the plant com-munity. We have already seen how seed-eating insects androdents can slow successions in old ﬁelds and sand dunes by causing a higher seed mortalilty of later successional species. A particularly dramatic example of a role for animals, and on amuch larger scale, comes from the savanna at Ndara in Kenya.
The vegetation in savannas is often held in check by grazers. The experimental exclusion of elephants from a plot of savannaled to a more than threefold increase in the density of trees overa 10-year period (work by Oweyegha-Afundaduula, reported in Deshmukh, 1986).
More often though, animals are passive followers of succes-
sions amongst the plants. This is certainly the case for passerinebird species in an old-ﬁeld succession (Figure 16.15). Arbuscularmycorrhizal fungi (see Section 13.8.2), which show a clearsequence of species replacement in the soils associated with an old-ﬁeld succession ( Johnson et al. , 1991), may also be passive
followers of the plants. But this does not mean that the birds, which eat seeds, or the fungi, which affect plant growth and 
survival, do not inﬂuence the succession in its course. Theyprobably do.
•• ••Attribute Early successional plants Late successional plants
Seed dispersal in time Well dispersed Poorly dispersed
Seed germination:enhanced by
light Yes Noﬂuctuating temperatures Yes Nohigh NO
3−Yes No
inhibited by
far-red light Yes Nohigh CO
2concentration Yes No?
Light saturation intensity High LowLight compensation point High LowEfﬁciency at low light Low HighPhotosynthetic rates High LowRespiration rates High LowTranspiration rates High LowStomatal and mesophyll resistances Low HighResistance to water transport Low HighRecovery from resource limitation Fast SlowResource acquisition rates Fast Slow?Table 16.3 Physiological characteristics 
of early and late successional plants. 
(After Bazzaz, 1979.)
animals are often
affected by, but may also affect,successionsEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 487488 CHAPTER 16
16.6.7 Concept of the climax
Do successions come to an end? It is clear that a stable equilibrium
will occur if individuals that die are replaced on a one-to-one basis by young of the same species. At a slightly more complexlevel, Markov models (see Section 16.5) tell us that a stationaryspecies composition should, in theory, occur whenever the replace-
ment probabilities (of one species by itself or by any one of severalothers) remain constant through time.
The concept of the climax has a long history. One of the 
earliest students of succession, Frederic Clements (1916), is asso-ciated with the idea that a single climax will dominate in any givenclimatic region, being the endpoint of all successions, whether theyhappened to start from a sand dune, an abandoned old ﬁeld oreven a pond ﬁlling in and progressing towards a terrestrial climax.This monoclimax view was challenged by many ecologists, amongst
whom Tansley (1939) was prominent. The polyclimax school of
thought recognized that a local climax may be governed by one
factor or a combination of factors: climate, soil conditions, topo-graphy, ﬁre and so on. Thus, a single climatic area could easilycontain a number of speciﬁc climax types. Later still, Whittaker(1953) proposed his climax pattern hypothesis. This conceives 
a continuity of climax types, varying gradually along environ-
mental gradients and not necessarilyseparable into discrete climaxes. (This isan extension of Whittaker’s approach to gradient analysis of vegetation, dis-cussed in Section 16.3.1.)
In fact, it is very difﬁcult to identify
a stable climax community in the ﬁeld.
•• ••Community
type
ForestGrass–
shrubGrasslandBare
field
Scutellospora  spp.
Glomus  spp.
Acaulospora elegansWood thrush
Hooded warbler
Summer tanager
Prairie warbler
Cardinal
Field sparrow
Grasshopper sparrow
Figure 16.15 Top: bird species
distributions along a plant succession
gradient in the Piedmont region ofGeorgia, USA. Differential shadingindicates relative abundance of the birds.
(After Johnston & Odum, 1956; fromGathreaux, 1978.) Bottom: distributions of vesicular–arbuscular mycorrhizae in thesoils associated with an old-ﬁeld successionin Minnesota. Differential shading indicatesrelative abundance of spores of species in the genera Scutellospora, Glomus and
Acaulospora . (After Johnson et al. , 1991).
climaxes may be
approached rapidly – or, so slowly thatthey are rarely everreachedEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 488THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 489
Usually, we can do no more than point out that the rate of change
of succession slows down to the point where any change isimperceptible to us. In this context, the subtidal rockface successionillustrated in Figure 16.12 is unusual in that convergence to a climax took only a few years. Old-ﬁeld successions might take
100–500 years to reach a ‘climax’, but in that time the probabil-ities of further ﬁres or hurricanes are so high that a process ofsuccession may rarely go to completion. If we bear in mind thatforest communities in northern temperate regions, and probablyalso in the tropics, are still recovering from the last glaciation (see Chapter 1), it is questionable whether the idealized climaxvegetation is often reached in nature.
16.7 Communities in a spatiotemporal context:
the patch dynamics perspective
A forest, or a rangeland, that appears 
to have reached a stable communitystructure when studied on a scale of
hectares, will always be a mosaic of miniature successions. Everytime a tree falls or a grass tussock dies, an opening is created in
which a new succession starts. One of the most seminal papersin the history of ecology was entitled ‘Pattern and process in the plant community’ (Watt, 1947). Part of the pattern of a com-munity is caused by the dynamic processes of deaths, replacementsand microsuccessions that the broad view may conceal. Thus,although we can point to patterns in community composition inspace (see Section 16.3) and in time (see Section 16.4), it is oftenmore meaningful to consider space and time together.
We have already seen that disturb-
ances that open up gaps are common
in all kinds of community. The forma-tion of gaps is obviously of consider-able signiﬁcance to sessile or sedentary
species that have a requirement for open space, but gaps have alsoproved to be important for mobile species such as invertebrateson the beds of streams (Matthaei & Townsend, 2000). The patchdynamics concept of communities views the habitat as patchy,with patches being disturbed and recolonized by individuals ofvarious species. Implicit in the patch dynamics view is a criticalrole for disturbance as a reset mechanism (Pickett & White, 1985).A single patch without migration is, by deﬁnition, a closed system,and any extinction caused by disturbance would be ﬁnal. How-
ever, extinction within a patch in an open system is not necessarilythe end of the story because of the possibility of reinvasion fromother patches.
Fundamental to the patch dynamics perspective is recogni-
tion of the importance of migration between habitat patches. This may involve adult individuals, but very often the process of most signiﬁcance is the dispersal of immature propagules(seeds, spores, larvae) and their recruitment to populationswithin habitat patches. The order of arrival and relative recruit-
ment levels of individual species may determine or modify thenature and outcome of population interactions in the community(Booth & Brosnan, 1995).
In Section 16.4.1 we identiﬁed two fundamentally different 
kinds of situations within communities: those in which some 
species are strongly competitively superior are dominance controlled
(equivalent to succession) and those in which all species have similar competitive abilities are founder controlled . Within the
patch dynamics framework, the dynamics of these two situationsare different and we deal with them in turn.
16.7.1 Dominance-controlled communities
In patch dynamics models where some
species are competitively superior toothers, the effect of the disturbance isto knock the community back to an earlier stage of succession(Figure 16.16). The open space is colonized by one or more of 
a group of opportunistic, early successional species (p
l, p2, etc., 
in Figure 16.16). As time passes, more species invade, often 
those with poorer powers of dispersal. These eventually reach maturity, dominating mid-succession (m
1, m2, etc.) and many 
or all of the pioneer species are driven to extinction. Later still,the community regains the climax stage when the most efﬁcientcompetitors (c
l, c2, etc.) oust their neighbors. In this sequence, 
diversity starts at a low level, increases at the mid-successionalstage and usually declines again at the climax. The gap essentiallyundergoes a minisuccession.
Some disturbances are synchronized,
or phased, over extensive areas. A forest
ﬁre may destroy a large tract of a climaxcommunity. The whole area then proceeds through a more orless synchronous succession, with diversity increasing through theearly colonization phase and falling again through competitiveexclusion as the climax is approached. Other disturbances are much smaller and produce a patchwork of habitats. If these dis-turbances are unphased, the resulting community comprises a mosaic of patches at different stages of succession. A climax
mosaic, produced by unphased disturbances, is much richer inspecies than an extensive area undisturbed for a very long periodand occupied by just one or a few dominant climax species.Towne (2000) monitored the plant species that established in prairiegrassland where large ungulates had died (mainly bison, Bos
bison ). Scavengers remove most of the body tissue but copious
amounts of body ﬂuids and decomposition products seep into thesoil. The ﬂush of nutrients combined with death of the previousvegetation produces a competitor-free, disturbed area whereresources are unusually abundant. The patches are also exceptionalbecause the soil has not been disturbed (as it would be after aploughed ﬁeld is abandoned or a badger makes a burrow); thus,
•• ••disturbance . . .
gaps . . . dispersal . . .
recruitmentthe idea of asuccessional mosaicdominance controland succession
disturbance scale and phasingEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 489490 CHAPTER 16
the colonizing plants do not derive from the local seed bank. The
unusual nature of the disturbed patches means that many of thepioneer species are rare in the prairie as a whole, and carcass sitescontribute to species diversity and community heterogeneity formany years.
16.7.2 Frequency of gap formation
The inﬂuence that disturbances have ona community depends strongly on thefrequency with which gaps are openedup. In this context, the intermediatedisturbance hypothesis (Connell, 1978;
see also the earlier account by Horn, 1975) proposes that the high-
est diversity is maintained at intermediate levels of disturbance.Soon after a severe disturbance, propagules of a few pioneer speciesarrive in the open space. If further disturbances occur frequently,gaps will not progress beyond the pioneer stage in Figure 16.16,and the diversity of the community as a whole will be low. As the interval between disturbances increases, the diversity willalso increase because time is available for the invasion of morespecies. This is the situation at an intermediate frequency of disturbance. At very low frequencies of disturbance, most of thecommunity for most of the time will reach and remain at the climax, with competitive exclusion having reduced diversity.This is shown diagrammatically in Figure 16.17, which plots the
pattern of species richness to be expected as a result of unphasedhigh, intermediate and low frequencies of gap formation, in separate patches and for the community as a whole.
The inﬂuence of the frequency of 
gap formation was studied in southernCalifornia by Sousa (1979a, 1979b), inan intertidal algal community associatedwith boulders of various sizes. Wave
action disturbs small boulders more often than large ones. Usinga sequence of photographs, Sousa estimated the probability that agiven boulder would be moved during the course of 1 month. Aclass of mainly small boulders (which required a force of less than49 Newtons to move them) had a monthly probability of move-ment of 42%. An intermediate class (which required a force of50–294 N) had a much smaller monthly probability of movement,
•• ••Diversity
Long after a disturbanceLow
Soon after a disturbanceHigh
Timepimici
Pioneer and early successional communities
p1
p3p2c1
c4
c3c4
c2c3
c1c1
p2c4
c3c2m5m4
m1
m3
m2p4
p3 p2p1
m1
m3Mid-successional Climax
Figure 16.16 Hypothetical minisuccession in a gap. The occupancy of gaps is reasonably predictable. Diversity begins at a low level 
as a few pioneer (pi) species arrive; reaches a maximum in mid-succession when a mixture of pioneer, mid-successional (mi) and 
climax (ci) species occur together; and drops again as competitive exclusion by the climax species takes place.
Connell’s
‘intermediatedisturbancehypothesis’boulders on a rockyshore that vary indisturbability . . .EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 490THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 491
9%. Finally, the class of mainly large boulders (which required a
force >294 N) moved with a probability of only 0.1% per month.
The ‘disturbability’ of the boulders had to be assessed in termsof the force required to move them, rather than simply in termsof top surface area, because some rocks which appeared to be 
small were actually stable portions of larger, buried boulders, and a few large boulders with irregular shapes moved when a relatively small force was applied. The three classes of boulder(<49, 50–294 and >294 N) can be viewed as patches exposed to
a decreasing frequency of disturbance when waves caused by winter storms overturn them.
Species richness increased during early stages of succession
through a process of colonization by the pioneer green alga Ulva spp. and various other algae, but declined again at the 
climax because of competitive exclusion by the perennial red 
alga Gigartina canaliculata. It is important to note that the same
succession occurred on small boulders that had been artiﬁciallymade stable. Thus, variations in the communities associatedwith the surfaces of boulders of different size were not simply an effect of size, but rather of differences in the frequency withwhich they were disturbed.
Communities on unmanipulated
boulders in each of the three size/disturbability classes were assessed onfour occasions. Table 16.4 shows that
the percentage of bare space decreased from small to large boulders, indicating the effects of the greater frequency of dis-
turbance of small boulders. Mean species richness was lowest on the regularly disturbed small boulders. These were dominatedmost commonly by Ulva spp. (and barnacles, Chthamalus ﬁssus ).
The highest levels of species richness were consistently recordedon the intermediate boulder class. Most held mixtures of three
to ﬁve abundant species from all successional stages. The largestboulders had a lower mean species richness than the inter-mediate class, although a monoculture was achieved on only afew boulders. G. canaliculata covered most of the rock surfaces.
These results offer strong support for the intermediate dis-
turbance hypothesis as far as frequency of appearance of gaps 
is concerned. However, we must be careful not to lose sight of the fact that this is a highly stochastic process. By chance, somesmall boulders were not overturned during the period of study.These few were dominated by the climax species G. canaliculata .
Conversely, two large boulders in the May census had beenoverturned, and these became dominated by the pioneer Ulva.
On average, however, species richness and species composition
followed the predicted pattern.
This study deals with a single community conveniently com-
posed of identiﬁable patches (boulders) that become gaps (whenoverturned by waves) at short, intermediate or long intervals.Recolonization occurs mainly from propagules derived fromother patches in the community. Because of the pattern of dis-turbance, this mixed boulder community is more diverse than wouldbe one with only large boulders.
Disturbances in small streams often
take the form of bed movements dur-ing periods of high discharge. Becauseof differences in ﬂow regimes and in the substrates of stream beds,some stream communities are disturbed more frequently and 
to a larger extent than others. This variation was assessed in 54stream sites in the Taieri River in New Zealand (Townsend et al. ,
1997) by recording the frequency at which at least 40% (chosenarbitrarily) of the bed moved and the average percentage that
•• ••
Species richnessRate of disturbance
Whole
communityGap 1
Gap 2
Gap 3Frequent Rare
TimeIntermediate
. . . provide support
for the hypothesisfurther support froma study of streamsFigure 16.17 Diagrammatic
representation of the time course of 
species richness in three gaps, and in the community as a whole, at threefrequencies of disturbance. The disturbance
is unphased. Dashed lines indicate thephase of competitive exclusion as theclimax is approached.EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 491492 CHAPTER 16
moved (assessed on ﬁve occasions during 1 year, using painted
particles of sizes characteristic of the stream bed in question). Thepattern of richness of insect species conformed to the intermedi-ate disturbance hypothesis (Figure 16.18). It is likely that low rich-ness at high frequencies and intensities of disturbance reﬂects the
inability of many species to persist in such situations. Whetherlow richness at low frequencies and intensities of disturbance isdue to competitive exclusion, as proposed in the intermediate disturbance hypothesis, remains to be tested.
16.7.3 Formation and ﬁlling of gaps
Gaps of different sizes may inﬂuence
community structure in different waysbecause of contrasting mechanisms ofrecolonization. The centers of very large gaps are most likely tobe colonized by species producing propagules that travel relatively
great distances. Such mobility is less important in small gaps, sincemost recolonizing propagules will be produced by adjacent estab-lished individuals. The smallest gaps of all may be ﬁlled simplyby lateral movements of individuals around the periphery.
Intertidal beds of mussels provide excellent opportunities 
to study the processes of formation and ﬁlling-in of gaps. In theabsence of disturbance, mussel beds may persist as extensivemonocultures. More often, they are an ever-changing mosaic ofmany species that inhabit gaps formed by the action of waves.
Gaps can appear virtually anywhere, and may exist for years as islands in a sea of mussels. The size of these gaps at the timeof formation ranges from the dimensions of a single mussel to hundreds of square meters. In general, a mussel or group of mussels becomes inﬁrm or damaged through disease, predation,old age or, most often, the effects of storm waves or batteringby logs. Gaps begin to ﬁll as soon as they are formed.
•• ••Species richness
Boulder class Percentage
Census date (N) bare space Mean Standard error Range
November 1975 <49 78.0 1.7 0.18 1–4
50–294 26.5 3.7 0.28 2–7
>294 11.4 2.5 0.25 1–6
May 1976 <49 66.5 1.9 0.19 1–5
50–294 35.9 4.3 0.34 2–6
>294 4.7 3.5 0.26 1–6
October 1976 <49 67.7 1.9 0.14 1–4
50–294 32.2 3.4 0.40 2–7
>294 14.5 2.3 0.18 1–6
May 1977 <49 49.9 1.4 0.16 1–4
50–294 34.2 3.6 0.20 2–5
>294 6.1 3.2 0.21 1–5Table 16.4 Seasonal patterns in bare
space and species richness on boulders in
each of three classes, categorized accordingto the force (in Newtons) required to movethem. (After Sousa, 1979b.)Number of species
100152530
20
Intensity of disturbance (mean % of bed moved)(b)
20
40 60 80Number of species
100152530
0.2
Frequency of disturbance(a)
20
0.6 0.8 1.0 0.4
Figure 16.18 Relationship between invertebrate species richness
and: (a) frequency of disturbance – assessed as the number of
occasions in 1 year when more than 40% of the bed moved(analysis of variance signiﬁcant at P<0.0001), and (b) intensity 
of disturbance – average percentage of the bed that moved
(polynomial regression ﬁtted, relationship signiﬁcant at P<0.001)
assessed at 54 stream sites in the Taieri River, New Zealand. The patterns are essentially the same; intensity and frequency ofdisturbance are strongly correlated. (After Townsend et al., 1997.)inﬂuence of gap 
size . . .EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 492THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 493
In their experimental study of 
mussel beds of Brachidontes solisianus
and B. darwinius in Brazil, Tanaka and Magalhaes (2002) aimed
to determine the differential effects of patch size and perimeter :
area ratio on the dynamics of succession. In an experiment on 
one moderately exposed shoreline, they created square gaps with different areas (because of identical shapes, the bigger squares had smaller perimeter : area ratios) (Table 16.5). On a nearby andphysically very similar shore, they created patches of four differ-ent shapes and chose areas for each that produced identicalperimeter : area ratios (Figure 16.19a). Note that a circle has themost perimeter per unit area of any shape. The gap sizes werewithin the range observed for natural gaps, which did not differon the two shores (Figure 16.19b).
Higher densities of the herbivorous
limpet Collisella subrugosa occurred in the
small gaps in the ﬁrst 6 months after gap
formation (Figure 16.19c). Small gaps,compared to medium and large gaps,were also most quickly colonized by 
lateral migration of the two mussel species, but with B. darwinius
predominating. The larger gaps had higher densities of the barn-acle Chthamalus bisinuatus and sheltered more limpets at their 
edges, while central areas had more Brachiodontes recruited from
larvae after 6 months (Figure 16.19d). The gaps with identicalperimeter : area ratios showed very similar patterns of coloniza-tion despite their different sizes, emphasizing that colonization
dynamics are mainly determined by distance from adjacent sourcesof colonists.
The limpet is probably associated with patch edges because
here they are less vulnerable to visually hunting predators. Thenegative relationship between distributions of the limpet and the barnacle may be due to the former dislodging the latter from the substrate. Tanaka and Magalhaes conclude that the musselB. darwinius is a more effective colonist of disturbed patches 
than B. solisianus , and suggest that B. darwinius would gradually
come to dominate the whole of the shoreline if it were not for
occasional massive recruitment events of B. solisianus .
The pattern of colonization of gaps
in mussel beds is repeated in almost
every detail in the colonization of gapsin grassland caused by burrowing animals or patches killed by urine.Initially, leaves lean into the gap from plants outside it. Then colonization begins by clonal spread from the edges, and a verysmall gap may close up quickly. In larger gaps, new colonists mayenter as dispersed seed, or germinate from the seed bank in thesoil. Over 2–3 years the vegetation begins to acquire the characterthat it had before the gap was formed.
The gaps produced in forests vary
greatly in size. Lightning-induced gaps
in mangrove forest in the DominicanRepublic, for example, range from 200 to 1600 m
2 or more
(Figure 16.20). Lightning almost always kills groups of trees in a20–30 m circle, and the trees remain as standing dead for severalyears. In a forest dominated by red mangrove Rhizophora mangle
and white mangrove Laguncularia racemosa , and with some black
mangrove Avicennia germinans , Sherman et al. (2000) compared 
the performance of the three species in lightning gaps and under
forest canopy. Seedling density did not differ in gaps and intactforest, but sapling density and the growth rates of all threespecies were much higher in the gaps (Table 16.6). However, gapregeneration was dominated by R. mangle because its mortality
rate was much lower in gaps than was the case for the other species.Sherman et al. (2000) note that the peat mat on the forest ﬂoor
usually collapses after lightning damage, resulting in increased 
levels of standing water. They suggest that the success of R. mangle
in gaps is due to their higher tolerance of ﬂooding conditions.
Organisms other than plants can also be overrepresented in
gaps. In a study of tropical rainforest in Costa Rica, Levey (1988)found that nectarivorous and frugivorous birds were much moreabundant in treefall gaps, reﬂecting the fact that understoryplants in gaps tend to produce more fruit over a longer periodthan conspeciﬁcs fruiting under a closed canopy.
16.7.4 Founder-controlled communities
In the dominance-controlled commun-
ities discussed in Section 16.7.1 there wasthe familiar rand Kselection dichotomy
in which colonizing ability and com-petitive status are inversely related. In
founder-controlled communities, on theother hand, all species are both good colonists and essentially equal competitors; thus, within a patch opened by disturbance,a competitive lottery rather than a predictable succession is to 
•• ••. . . and gap shape
colonization 
of gaps . . .. . . in mussel beds, . . ....i n  g r a s s l a n d...
. . . and in mangroveforest
founder-controlledcommunities: acompetitive lotterynot a predictablesuccessionTable 16.5 Measures of area, perimeter and perimeter : area
ratio for the experimental gaps created in two experiments on
semiexposed shores in southeast Brazil. (From Tanaka &Magalhaes, 2002.)
Area (cm2) Perimeter (cm) Perimeter : area ratio
Patch size effects
Square 25 20 0.8
Square 100 40 0.2Square 400 80 0.2
Patch shape effects
Square 100.0 40.0 0.4Circle 78.5 31.4 0.4Rectangle 112.5 45.0 0.4Sector 190.1 78.6 0.4EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 493•• ••494 CHAPTER 16
Density (individuals cm–2)Chthamalus bisinuatus
0102030(c)Density (individuals cm–2)Collisella subrugosa
00.20.40.6Percent cover
02040Brachidontes solisianusPercent cover
0204080
1994Brachidontes darwinianus
Sep July May Mar Jan Nov Sep
199560
Density (individuals cm–2)Chthamalus bisinuatus
051020(d)
Density (individuals cm–2)
00.4Brachidontes  recruitsDensity (individuals cm–2)
00.10.20.3
1994Collisella subrugosa
Sep July May Mar Jan Nov Sep
199515
0.3
0.2
0.1
Year Year(a)
Small
Medium
Large
CenterPeripheryFrequency (%)
> 400 100–400 0–49060
50–99
Gap size (cm2)(b)
50
40
30
20
10
Figure 16.19 (a) The four shapes used in patch-shape experiments: square, circle, rectangle and ‘sector’ (see Table 16.5). (b) Size
distribution of natural gaps in the mussel beds. (c) Mean abundances (±SE) of four colonizing species in experimentally cleared  small,
medium and large square gaps. (d) Recruitment of three species at the periphery (within 5 cm of the gap edge) and in the center of 
400 cm2square gaps. (After Tanaka & Magalhaes, 2002.)EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 494••THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 495
be expected. If a large number of species are approximately
equivalent in their ability to invade gaps, are equally tolerant of the abiotic conditions and can hold the gaps against all comers during their lifetime, then the probability of competitiveexclusion may be much reduced in an environment where gaps
are appearing continually and randomly. A further condition forcoexistence is that the number of young that invade and occupythe gaps should not be consistently greater for parent popula-tions that produce more offspring, otherwise the most productivespecies would come to monopolize space even in a continuouslydisturbed environment.
If these idealized conditions are met,
it is possible to envisage how the occu-pancy of a series of gaps will change
through time (Figure 16.21). On each
occasion that an organism dies (or is killed) the gap is reopenedfor invasion. All conceivable replacements are possible andspecies richness will be maintained at a high level. Some tropicalreef communities of ﬁsh may conform to this model (Sale, 1977,1979). They are extremely diverse. For example, the number ofspecies of ﬁsh on the Great Barrier Reef ranges from 900 in thesouth to 1500 in the north, and more than 50 resident species may be recorded on a single patch of reef 3 m in diameter. 
Only a proportion of this diversity is likely to be attributable toresource partitioning of food and space – indeed, the diets of many of the coexisting species are very similar. In this commun-ity, vacant living space seems to be a crucial limiting factor, and
it is generated unpredictably in space and time when a residentdies or is killed. The lifestyles of the species match this state ofaffairs. They breed often, sometimes year-round, and producenumerous clutches of dispersive eggs or larvae. It can be arguedthat the species compete in a lottery for living space in which larvae are the tickets, and the ﬁrst arrival at the vacant space winsthe site, matures quickly and holds the space for its lifetime.
Three species of herbivorous pomacentrid ﬁsh co-occur on 
the upper slope of Heron Reef, part of the Great Barrier Reef 
off eastern Australia. Within rubble patches, the available spaceis occupied by a series of contiguous and usually nonoverlappingterritories, each up to 2 m
2in area, held by individuals of Eupo-
macentrus apicalis ,Plectroglyphidodon lacrymatus and Pomacentrus
wardi. Individuals hold territories throughout their juvenile and
adult life and defend them against a broad range of chieﬂy 
herbivorous species, including conspeciﬁcs. There seems to be no
particular tendency for space initially held by one species to be
••
Number of gapsAverage size = 724 m2
Average diameter = 30.4 m
1400–160001416
Gap size (m2)12
10
8
46
2
1200–14001000–1200800–1000600–800400–600200–400< 200
Figure 16.20 Frequency distribution of gaps created by 
lightning in a tropical mangrove forest in the Dominican 
Republic. (After Sherman et al. , 2000.)
Initial sapling diameter Growth rate–diameter 
(cm±SE) increment (cm ±SE) Mortality (%)
Gaps Canopy Gaps Canopy Gaps Canopy
Rhizophora mangle 1.9±0.06 2.3 ±0.06 0.58 ±0.03 0.09 ±0.01 9 16
Laguncularia racemosa 1.7±0.11 1.8 ±0.84 0.46 ±0.04 0.11 ±0.06 32 40
Avicennia germinans 1.3±0.25 1.7 ±0.45 0.51 ±0.04 – 56 88Table 16.6 Initial size, and growth 
and mortality rates over a 1-year period of saplings of three mangrove species inlightning-induced gaps and under intactforest canopy. (After Sherman et al. , 2000.)
DiversityHigh
LowAB
C
ED
Time
C B D A
B BC C
C CA
E
BE A
C CD
BAC
B
AA
CD
DE
EB
Figure 16.21 Hypothetical competitive lottery: occupancy of
gaps which periodically become available. Each of species A–E is
equally likely to ﬁll a gap, regardless of the identity of its previousoccupant. Species richness remains high and relatively constant.
ﬁsh coexisting on
coral reefsEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 495496 CHAPTER 16
taken up, following mortality, by the same species. Nor is any
successional sequence of ownership evident (Table 16.7). P. wardi
both recruited and lost individuals at a higher rate than the other two species, but all three species appear to have recruitedat a sufﬁcient level to balance their rates of loss and maintain a
resident population of breeding individuals.
Thus, the maintenance of high reef
diversity depends, at least in part, on the unpredictability of the supply ofliving space; and as long as all species
win some of the time and in some places, they will continue toput larvae into the plankton, and hence, into the lottery for newsites. An analogous situation has been postulated for the highlydiverse chalk grasslands of Great Britain (Grubb, 1977) and even
for trees in temperate and tropical forest gaps (Busing & Brokaw,2002). Any small gap that appears is rapidly exploited, by a seedin grassland and very often by a sapling in a forest gap. In thesecases, the tickets in the lottery are saplings or seeds (either in theact of dispersal or as components of a persistent seed bank in thesoil). Which seeds or saplings develop to established plants, andtherefore which species comes to occupy the gap, may dependon a strong random element since many species overlap in theirrequirements for successful growth. The successful plant rapidlyestablishes itself and retains the patch for its lifetime, in a similarway to the reef ﬁsh described above.
16.8 Conclusions: the need for a landscape
perspective
The lottery hypothesis and the notion
of the founder-controlled communitywere important steps in the develop-ment of our understanding of the rangeof community dynamics that can occur.However, these should be viewed not as hard and fast rules to
which some communities are subject, but rather as extremes on a continuum from dominance to founder control. Real com-munities may be closer to one or other end of this continuum,but in reality component species or component patches may bedominance controlled or founder controlled within the samecommunity. Syms and Jones (2000), for example, acknowledgethat more than half of within-reef variation in ﬁsh species com-position in their study of patch reefs in the Great Barrier Reef was attributable to unexplained, and thus possibly stochastic, factors such as those emphasized in the lottery hypothesis. But asigniﬁcant proportion of variation could be explained by speciﬁchabitat requirements of the constituent species.
More generally, no community is
truly the homogeneous, temporallyinvariant system described by simpleLotka–Volterra mathematics and ex-empliﬁed by laboratory microcosms,although some are less variable than others. In most real com-munities, population dynamics will be spatially distributed and temporal variation will be present. In a closed system, com-posed of a single patch, species extinctions can occur for two 
very different reasons: (i) as a result of biotic instability causedby competitive exclusion, overexploitation and other strongly destabilizing species interactions; or (ii) as a result of environmentalinstability caused by unpredictable disturbances and changes inconditions. By integrating unstable patches of either of these typesinto the open system of a larger landscape (consisting of manypatches out of phase with each other), persistent species-richcommunities can result (DeAngelis & Waterhouse, 1987). This isthe principal message to emerge from the patch dynamics per-spective, and its larger scale counterpart, ‘landscape ecology’(Wiens et al. , 1993), stressing the importance of the spatial 
scale at which we view communities and the open nature of most of them. Note the strong link between the patch dynamics
view of community organization and metapopulation theory, which deals with the effects on the dynamics of populations ofdividing them into fragments (see Section 6.9). In a model thatcombines extinction–colonization dynamics (the metapopulationapproach) with the dynamics of patch succession, Amarasekareand Possingham (2001) show that persistence of a species in thelandscape depends: (i) on the net rate at which suitable patchesarise relative to the species’ colonization ability; as well as (ii) the longevity of the dormant stages (e.g. seed bank) relative
to disturbance frequency.
Future development of ideas about
patch dynamics is likely to concern the consequences of multiple classes ofdisturbance. Steinauer and Collins (2001) have made a start byshowing that disturbances caused by urine deposition and grazingby bison ( Bos bison ) interact with each other. The abundance of four
common grass species, and of all of them combined, increased
•• ••Table 16.7 Numbers of individuals of each species observed
occupying sites, or parts of sites, that had been vacated during 
the immediately prior interperiod between censuses through theloss of residents of each species. The sites vacated through loss of 120 residents have been reoccupied by 131 ﬁsh; the species of the
new occupant is not dependent on the species of the previousresident.
Reoccupied by:
Resident lost E. apicalis P. lacrymatus P. wardi
Eupomacentrus apicalis 93 1 9
Plectroglyphidodon lacrymatus 12 5 9
Pomacentrus wardi 27 18 29
plants in grassland 
or forestimportance of a‘landscape ecology’perspective
multiple classes ofdisturbance . . .
founder anddominance control as a continuum of possibilitiesEIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 496THE NATURE OF THE COMMUNITY 497
Finally, just as we can readily see
how community dynamics may vary
according to the order in which colon-izing species happen to appear after adisturbance, it is equally the case that the order in which differ-
ent kinds of disturbance occur may affect the outcome. Fukami(2001) addressed this issue by introducing two classes of distur-bance (drought or the addition of predatory mosquito larvae) in various sequences to laboratory micrososms of protists and small metazoans (analogous to natural communities in water-ﬁlled bamboo stumps). Different disturbance sequences drove themicrocosms into different successional trajectories, sometimes leading to divergence in ﬁnal community composition (both interms of species richness and relative abundance of the com-
ponent species). This is illustrated graphically by ordination diagrams (see Section 16.3.2) that show the sequence of positionsof communities in the same ordination space through experi-ments where disturbances were imposed in different sequences(Figure 16.22). It may often be the case that a knowledge of thedisturbance history will be needed to predict the responses of communities to disturbances imposed in the future (such asglobal climate change).
Summary
The community is an assemblage of species populations that 
occur together in space and time. Community ecology seeks tounderstand the manner in which groupings of species are dis-tributed in nature, and how they are inﬂuenced by their abioticenvironment and by species interactions.
We begin by explaining how the structure of communities 
can be measured and described, in terms of species composition,
species richness, diversity, equitability (evenness) and rank–abundance diagrams.
•• ••Figure 16.22 (left) Temporal changes in species composition 
and relative abundance of microcosms composed of a speciﬁc mix
of protists and metazoans. The change is expressed in ordinationplots based on a procedure called detrended correspondenceanalysis (DCA). (Recall that ordination is a mathematical treatment
that allows communities to be organized on a graph so that those that are most similar in species composition and relativeabundance appear closest together, whilst communities that differ greatly in the relative importance of a similar set of species,or that possess quite different species, appear far apart.) Datapoints are the mean ordination scores on different days in theexperiment (from day 5 to day 35). The letter D indicates periodsof drought disturbance, and the letter M, mosquito disturbance.(a–e) The results of the control and disturbances imposed in
different sequences. (After Fukami, 2001.). . . may interact 
to determinecommunity patternsDCA axis 2Control
100150200250(a)
DCA axis 2DDMM
100150200250(b)
DCA axis 2DMDM
100150200250(c)
DCA axis 2MMDD
100150200250(d)
DCA axis 2MDMD
3501000150200250
300(e)
250 200 350 300 50
DCA axis 111
5
713
17
2519
35
11
1317
53519
1125
7M D
DM
1113
17
535192325
7M
D
DM
13
17
519
23257
M D
DM
111317
53519
11257M
DDM35on urine patches in ungrazed prairie grassland. However, the 
abundance of the grass Andropogon gerardii , and all grasses com-
bined, decreased on urine patches in grazed prairie. The changeddynamics reﬂect the fact that bison preferentially graze on urinepatches. In addition, grazed areas initiated on urine patches tend
to expand well beyond the area of urine deposition, increasingthe size and severity of disturbance by grazing.EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 497498 CHAPTER 16
The assessment of community patterns in space has progressed
from subjective ‘gradient analysis’ to objective mathematical
approaches (‘classiﬁcation’ and ‘ordination’) that permit rela-tionships between community composition and abiotic factors to be systematically explored. We note that most communities
are not delimited by sharp boundaries, where one group ofspecies is abruptly replaced by another. Moreover a given speciesthat occurs in one predictable association is also quite likely tooccur with another group of species under different conditionselsewhere.
Just as the relative importance of species varies in space, so
their patterns of abundance may change with time. A particularspecies can occur where it is capable of reaching a location,appropriate conditions and resources exist, and competitors, pred-
ators and parasites do not preclude it. A temporal sequence in theappearance and disappearance of species therefore requires thatconditions, resources and/or the inﬂuence of enemies themselves
vary with time. We emphasize and explain patterns of communitychange that follow a disturbance. Sometimes these patterns arepredictable (succession; dominance control), in other cases highlystochastic (founder control).
Although we can discern and often explain patterns in com-
munity composition in space and in time, it is often more mean-
ingful to consider space and time together. The patch dynamicsconcept of communities views the landscape as patchy, withpatches being disturbed and recolonized by individuals of variousspecies. Implicit in this view are critical roles for disturbance as a reset mechanism, and of migration between habitat patches.The community dynamics of patchy landscapes are stronglyinﬂuenced by the frequency of gap formation and the sizes and
shapes of these gaps in relation to the colonization and com-petitive properties of the species concerned.
••EIPC16  10/24/05  2:10 PM  Page 498••17.1 Introduction
All biological entities require matter for their construction and
energy for their activities. This is true not only for individual organisms, but also for the populations and communities that they form in nature. The intrinsic importance of ﬂuxes of energy(this chapter) and of matter (see Chapter 18) means that com-
munity processes are particularly strongly linked with the abioticenvironment. The term ecosystem is used to denote the biolo-
gical community together with the abiotic environment in which
it is set. Thus, ecosystems normally include primary producers,decomposers and detritivores, a pool of dead organic matter, herbivores, carnivores and parasites plus the physicochemical
environment that provides the living conditions and acts both as a source and a sink for energy and matter. Thus, as is the casewith all chapters in Part 3 of this book, our treatment calls upon
knowledge of individual organisms in relation to conditions andresources (Part 1) together with the diverse interactions thatpopulations have with one another (Part 2).
A classic paper by Lindemann (1942)
laid the foundations of a science ofecological energetics. He attempted to quantify the concept of food chainsand food webs by considering the efﬁci-
ency of transfer between trophic levels – from incident radiationreceived by a community through its capture by green plants inphotosynthesis to its subsequent use by herbivores, carnivores anddecomposers. Lindemann’s paper was a major catalyst for theInternational Biological Programme (IBP), which, with a view to
human welfare, aimed to understand the biological basis of pro-ductivity of areas of land, fresh waters and the seas (Worthington,1975). The IBP provided the ﬁrst occasion on which biologiststhroughout the world were challenged to work together towardsa common end. More recently, a further pressing issue has againgalvanized the community of ecologists into action. Deforestation,the burning of fossil fuels and other pervasive human inﬂuencesare causing dramatic changes to global climate and atmospheric
composition, and can be expected in turn to inﬂuence patternsof productivity on a global scale. Much of the current work onproductivity has a prime objective of providing the basis for pre-dicting the effects of changes in climate, atmospheric compositionand land use on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems (aspects thatwill be dealt with in Chapter 22).
The decades since Lindemann’s
classic work have seen a progressive
improvement in technology to assessproductivity. Early calculations in ter-restrial ecosystems involved sequentialmeasurements of biomass of plants (usually just the above-ground parts) and estimates of energy transfer efﬁciency betweentrophic levels. In aquatic ecosystems, production estimates relied
on changes in the concentrations of oxygen or carbon dioxide measured in experimental enclosures. Increasing sophistication in the measurement, in situ , of chlorophyll concentrations and of
the gases involved in photosynthesis, coupled with the develop-ment of satellite remote-sensing techniques, now permit theextrapolation of local results to the global scale (Field et al. , 1998).
Thus, satellite sensors can measure vegetation cover on land andchlorophyll concentrations in the sea, from which rates of lightabsorption are calculated and, based on our understanding of photosynthesis, these are converted to estimates of productivity(Geider et al. , 2001).
Before proceeding further it is 
necessary to deﬁne some new terms.The bodies of the living organisms
within a unit area constitute a standing
crop of biomass. By biomass we mean the mass of organisms per
unit area of ground (or per unit area or unit volume of water)and this is usually expressed in units of energy (e.g. J m
−2) or dry
organic matter (e.g. t ha−1) or carbon (e.g. g C m−2). The great 
bulk of the biomass in communities is almost always formed 
by plants, which are the primary producers of biomass because ofLindemann laid 
the foundations ofecological energeticsprogressiveimprovements intechnology to assessproductivity
some deﬁnitions:standing crop andbiomass, . . .
Chapter 17
The Flux of Energy 
through EcosystemsEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 499500 CHAPTER 17
their almost unique ability to ﬁx carbon in photosynthesis. (We
have to say ‘almost unique’ because bacterial photosynthesis andchemosynthesis may also contribute to forming new biomass.)Biomass includes the whole bodies of the organisms even thoughparts of them may be dead. This needs to be borne in mind, 
particularly when considering woodland and forest communities in which the bulk of the biomass is dead heartwood and bark.The living fraction of biomass represents active capital capableof generating interest in the form of new growth, whereas thedead fraction is incapable of new growth. In practice we includein biomass all those parts, living or dead, which are attached tothe living organism. They cease to be biomass when they fall offand become litter, humus or peat.
The primary productivity of a com-
munity is the rate at which biomass 
is produced per unit area by plants, theprimary producers. It can be expressedeither in units of energy (e.g. J m
−2day−1)
or dry organic matter (e.g. kg ha−1year−1)
or carbon (e.g. g C m−2year−1). The total
ﬁxation of energy by photosynthesis is referred to as gross primary
productivity (GPP). A proportion of this is respired away by the
plants (autotrophs) and is lost from the community as respiratory
heat (RA – autotrophic respiration ). The difference between GPP
and RA is known as net primary productivity (NPP) and represents
the actual rate of production of new biomass that is available 
for consumption by heterotrophic organisms (bacteria, fungi andanimals). The rate of production of biomass by heterotrophs iscalled secondary productivity .
Another way to view energy ﬂux 
in ecosystems involves the concept ofnet ecosystem productivity (NEP, using
the same units as GPP or NPP). This
acknowledges that the carbon ﬁxed inGPP can leave the system as inorganiccarbon (usually carbon dioxide) viaeither autotrophic respiration (RA) or, after consumption by heterotrophs, via heterotrophic respiration (RH)—the latter consisting
of respiration by bacteria, fungi and animals. Total ecosystem 
respiration (RE) is the sum of RA and RH. NEP then is equal to
GPP – RE. When GPP exceeds RE, the ecosystem is ﬁxing carbonfaster than it is being released and thus acts as a carbon sink. When RE exceeds GPP, carbon is being released faster than it 
is ﬁxed and the ecosystem is a net carbon source. That the rateof ecosystem respiration can exceed GPP may seem paradoxical.However, it is important to note that an ecosystem can receiveorganic matter from sources other than its own photosynthesis– via the import of dead organic matter that has been producedelsewhere. Organic matter produced by photosynthesis within anecosystem’s boundaries is known as autochthonous , whereas that
imported from elsewhere is called allochthonous .
In what follows we deal ﬁrst with large-scale patterns in 
primary productivity (Section 17.2) before considering the factors
that limit productivity in terrestrial (Section 17.3) and aquatic(Section 17.4) settings. We then turn to the fate of primary productivity and consider the ﬂux of energy through food webs(Section 17.5), placing particular emphasis on the relative import-ance of grazer and decomposer systems (we return to food websand their detailed population interactions in Chapter 20). We ﬁnally turn to seasonal and longer term variations in energy ﬂux
through ecosystems.
17.2 Patterns in primary productivity
The net primary production of the planet
is estimated to be about 105 petagramsof carbon per year (1 Pg =10
15g) (Geider
et al. , 2001). Of this, 56.4 Pg C year−1 is
produced in terrestrial ecosystems and48.3 Pg C year
−1in aquatic ecosystems
(Table 17.1). Thus, although oceans
•• ••. . . primary 
and secondaryproductivity,autotrophicrespiration, . . .
primary productivitydepends on, but is not solelydetermined by, solar radiation. . . net ecosystemproductivity, andheterotrophic andecosystem respiration
Marine NPP Terrestrial NPP
Tropical and subtropical oceans 13.0 Tropical rainforests 17.8
Temperate oceans 16.3 Broadleaf deciduous forests 1.5Polar oceans 6.4 Mixed broad/needleleaf forests 3.1Coastal 10.7 Needleleaf evergreen forests 3.1Salt marsh/estuaries/seaweed 1.2 Needleleaf deciduous forests 1.4Coral reefs 0.7 Savannas 16.8
Perennial grasslands 2.4Broadleaf shrubs with bare soil 1.0Tundra 0.8Desert 0.5Cultivation 8.0
Total 48.3 Total 56.4Table 17.1 Net primary production 
(NPP) per year for major biomes and for
the planet in total (in units of petragrams of C). (From Geider et al. , 2001.)EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 500THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 501
cover about two-thirds of the world’s surface, they account for
less than half of its production. On the land, tropical rainforestsand savannas account between them for about 60% of terrestrialNPP, reﬂecting the large areas covered by these biomes and 
their high levels of productiv ity. All biological activity is ultimately
dependent on received solar radiation but solar radiation alone
does not determine primary productivity. In very broad terms,the ﬁt between solar radiation and productivity is far from per-fect because incident radiation can be captured efﬁciently only when water and nutrients are available and when temperaturesare in the range suitable for plant growth. Many areas of landreceive abundant radiation but lack adequate water, and most areasof the oceans are deﬁcient in mineral nutrients.
17.2.1 Latitudinal trends in productivity
In the forest biomes of the world a
general latitudinal trend of increasingproductivity can be seen from boreal,through temperate, to tropical condi-tions (Table 17.2). However, there is 
also considerable variation, much of it due to differences in
water availability, local topography and associated variations in microclimate. The same latitudinal trend (and local variations)exists in the above-ground productivity of grassland communities(Figure 17.1). Note the considerable differences in the relative importance of above-ground and below-ground productivity inthe different grassland biomes. It is technically difﬁcult to estimatebelow-ground productivity and early reports of NPP often ignoredor underestimated the true values. As far as aquatic communities
are concerned, a latitudinal trend is clear in lakes (Brylinski & Mann,1973) but not in the oceans, where productivity may more oftenbe limited by a shortage of nutrients – very high productivity occurs in marine communities where there are upwellings of nutrient-rich waters, even at high latitudes and low temperatures.
The overall trends with latitude suggest that radiation (a resource)and temperature (a condition) may often limit the productivity ofcommunities. But other factors frequently constrain productivitywithin even narrower limits.
17.2.2 Seasonal and annual trends in primary
productivity
The large ranges in productivity in
Table 17.2 and the wide conﬁdenceintervals in Figure 17.1 emphasize the
•• ••the productivity of
forests, grasslandsand lakes follows alatitudinal pattern
productivity showsconsiderabletemporal variationTable 17.2 Gross primary productivity (GPP) of forests at various
latitudes in Europe and North and South America, estimated as
the sum of net ecosystem productivity and ecosystem respiration(calculated from CO
2ﬂuxes measured in the forest canopies – only
one estimate for tropical forest was included by the reviewers).(From data in Falge et al. , 2002.)
Range of GPP estimates Mean of estimates
Forest type (g C m−2year−1) ( gCm−2year−1)
Tropical rainforest 3249 3249
Temperate deciduous 1122–1507 1327Temperate coniferous 992–1924 1499Cold temperate deciduous 903–1165 1034Boreal coniferous 723–1691 1019
ANPP (g m–2 yr–1)
01000
3000BNPP (g m–2 yr–1)
1000
Cold
steppeTemperate
steppeHumid
temperateHumid
savannaSavanna(b)(a)
Figure 17.1 (a) The location of 31 grassland study sites included
in this analysis. (b) Above-ground net primary productivity 
(ANPP) and below-ground net primary productivity (BNPP) for ﬁve categories of grassland biomes (BNPP not available for temperate steppe). The values in each case are averages for
4–8 grassland studies. The technique involved summingincrements in the biomass of live plants, standing dead matter and litter between successive samples in the study period (average 6 years). (From Scurlock et al. , 2002.)EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 501••502 CHAPTER 17
considerable variation that exists within a given class of ecosys-
tems. It is important to note also that productivity varies fromyear to year in a single location (Knapp & Smith, 2001). This isillustrated for a temperate cropland, a tropical grassland and a trop-ical savanna in Figure 17.2. Such annual ﬂuctuations no doubt
reﬂect year-to-year variation in cloudless days, temperature andrainfall. At a smaller temporal scale, productivity reﬂects seasonalvariations in conditions, particularly in relation to the conse-quences of temperature for the length of the growing season. Forexample, the period when daily GPP is high persists for longerin temperate than in boreal situations (Figure 17.3). Moreover,the growing season is more extended but the amplitude of sea-sonal change is smaller in evergreen coniferous forests than in theirdeciduous counterparts (where the growing season is curtailed by
the shedding of leaves in the fall).
17.2.3 Autochthonous and allochthonous production
All biotic communities depend on a
supply of energy for their activities. In most terrestrial systems this is con-tributed in situ by the photosynthesis of
green plants – this is autochthonous production. Exceptions
exist, however, particularly where colonial animals deposit fecesderived from food consumed at a distance from the colony (e.g. bat colonies in caves, seabirds on coastland) – guano is an example of allochthonous organic matter (dead organic materialformed outside the ecosystem).
In aquatic communities, the auto-
chthonous input is provided by thephotosynthesis of large plants andattached algae in shallow waters (littoral
zone) and by microscopic phytoplanktonin the open water. However, a substantial proportion of theorganic matter in aquatic communities comes from allochthon-ous material that arrives in rivers, via groundwater or is blownin by the wind. The relative importance of the two autochthonoussources (littoral and planktonic) and the allochthonous source oforganic material in an aquatic system depends on the dimensionsof the body of water and the types of terrestrial community that
deposit organic material into it.
A small stream running through a wooded catchment 
derives most of its energy input from litter shed by surroundingvegetation (Figure 17.4). Shading from the trees prevents anysigniﬁcant growth of planktonic or attached algae or aquatichigher plants. As the stream widens further downstream, shadingby trees is restricted to the margins and autochthonous primaryproduction increases. Still further downstream, in deeper and moreturbid waters, rooted higher plants contribute much less, and the
role of the microscopic phytoplankton becomes more important.Where large river channels are characterized by a ﬂood plain, withassociated oxbow lakes, swamps and marshes, allochthonous dissolved and particulate organic may be carried to the river channel from its ﬂood plain during episodes of ﬂooding ( Junk et al. , 1989; Townsend 1996).
The sequence from small, shallow lakes to large, deep ones
shares some of the characteristics of the river continuum just 
discussed (Figure 17.5). A small lake is likely to derive quite a largeproportion of its energy from the land because its periphery islarge in relation to its area. Small lakes are also usually shallow,so internal littoral production is more important than that by phytoplankton. In contrast, a large, deep lake will derive only limited organic matter from outside (small periphery relative tolake surface area) and littoral production, limited to the shallowmargins, may also be low. The organic inputs to the communitymay then be due almost entirely to photosynthesis by the 
phytoplankton.
••NPP (g C m–2 yr–1)700
600
100
2000500
400300200
0
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
YearGrasslandCropland
SavannaFigure 17.2 Interannual variation 
in net primary productivity (NPP) in 
a grassland in Queensland, Australia (above-ground NPP), a cropland in Iowa,USA (total above- and below-ground NPP)
and a tropical savanna in Senegal (above-ground NPP). Black horizontal lines showthe mean NPP for the whole study period.(After Zheng et al. , 2003.)
autochthonous and
allochthonousproduction . . .
. . . vary in systematicways in lakes, riversand estuariesEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 502••THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 503
••Figure 17.3 Seasonal development of maximum daily gross primary productivity (GPP) for deciduous and coniferous forests in 
temperate (Europe and North America) and boreal locations (Canada, Scandinavia and Iceland). The different symbols in each pane l 
relate to different forests. Daily GPP is expressed as the percentage of the maximum achieved in each forest during 365 days of  the year.
(After Falge et al. , 2002.)
Relative contributions of
various energy inputs
Headwaters Main riverDead organic matter from
the surrounding terrestrialenvironment
Attached algaeLarge water plantsPhytoplankton
Figure 17.4 Longitudinal variation in 
the nature of the energy base in stream
communities.
% maximum GPP
0
Time (days)60100
75
50
120 180 240 300 360250100
7550
25
Boreal
deciduousTemperate
deciduousTemperate
coniferous
Boreal
coniferous
Time (days)60 120 180 240 300 36060 120 180 240 300 360 60 120 180 240 300 360EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 503504 CHAPTER 17
Estuaries are often highly productive systems, receiving
allochthonous material and a rich supply of nutrients from the
rivers that feed them. The most important autochthonous con-tribution to their energy base varies. In large estuarine basins, withrestricted interchange with the open ocean and with small marsh
peripheries relative to basin area, phytoplankton tend to domin-ate. By contrast, seaweeds dominate in some open basins withextensive connections to the sea. In turn, continental shelf communities derive a proportion of their energy from terrestrialsources (particularly via estuaries) and their shallowness often pro-vides for signiﬁcant production by littoral seaweed communities.Indeed, some of the most productive systems of all are to be foundamong seaweed beds and reefs.
Finally, the open ocean can be described in one sense as the
largest, deepest ‘lake’ of all. The input of organic material from
terrestrial communities is negligible, and the great depth precludesphotosynthesis in the darkness of the sea bed. The phytoplank-ton are then all-important as primary producers.
17.2.4 Variations in the relationship of productivity 
to biomass
We can relate the productivity of 
a community to the standing cropbiomass that produces it (the interestrate on the capital). Alternatively, we can think of the standing crop as thebiomass that is sustained by the productivity (the capital resource
that is sustained by earnings). Overall, there is a dramatic differ-ence in the total biomass that exists on land (800 Pg) comparedto the oceans (2 Pg) and fresh water ( <0.1 Pg) (Geider et al. , 2001).
On an areal basis, biomass on land ranges from 0.2 to 200 kg m
−2,
in the oceans from less than 0.001 to 6 kg m−2and in freshwater
biomass is generally less than 0.1 kg m−2(Geider et al. , 2001). The
average values of net primary productivity (NPP) and standing
crop biomass (B) for a range of community types are plotted againsteach other in Figure 17.6. It is evident that a given value of NPPis produced by a smaller biomass when nonforest terrestrial 
systems are compared with forests, and the biomass involved issmaller still when aquatic systems are considered. Thus NPP : Bratios (kilograms of dry matter produced per year per kilogramof standing crop) average 0.042 for forests, 0.29 for other terrest-rial systems and 17 for aquatic communities. The major reasonfor this is almost certainly that a large proportion of forestbiomass is dead (and has been so for a long time) and also that much of the living support tissue is not photosynthetic. In grassland and scrub, a greater proportion of the biomass is 
alive and involved in photosynthesis, though half or more of the biomass may be roots. In aquatic communities, particularlywhere productivity is due mainly to phytoplankton, there is no support tissue, there is no need for roots to absorb water andnutrients, dead cells do not accumulate (they are usually eatenbefore they die) and the photosynthetic output per kilogram ofbiomass is thus very high indeed. Another factor that helps toaccount for high NPP : B ratios in phytoplankton communities is
•• ••0100
50%Large
lake0100
50%Small
lakeMediumand largerivers
0100
50%Small
woodlandstream
0100
50%TerrestrialinputPrimary productionLittoral Planktonic
0100
50%Openocean0100
50%Continental
shelfLarge estuarieswith restrictedinterchange toocean0100
50%Open estuary
with extensiveconnections to
oceans0100
50%Terrestrial
inputPrimary productionLittoral Planktonic
Figure 17.5 Variation in the importance of terrestrial input of organic matter and littoral and planktonic primary production in
contrasting aquatic communities.
NPP : B ratios are
very low in forestsand very high inaquatic communitiesEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 504THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 505
the rapid turnover of biomass (turnover times of biomass in
oceans and fresh waters average 0.02–0.06 years, compared to 1–20 years on land; Geider et al. , 2001). The annual NPP shown in
the ﬁgure is actually produced by a number of overlapping phytoplankton generations, while the standing crop biomass is 
only the average present at an instant.
Ratios of NPP to biomass tend to
decrease during successions. This isbecause the early successional pioneersare rapidly growing herbaceous specieswith relatively little support tissue (see
Section 16.6). Thus, early in the succession the NPP : B ratio is high.However, the species that come to dominate later are generallyslow growing, but eventually achieve a large size and come to
monopolize the supply of space and light. Their structure involvesconsiderable investment in nonphotosynthesizing and dead sup-port tissues, and as a consequence their NPP : B ratio is low.
When attention is focused on trees, a common pattern is for
above-ground NPP to reach a peak early in succession and thengradually decline by as much as 76%, with a mean reduction of34% (Table 17.3). The reductions are no doubt partly due to ashift from photosynthesizing to respiring tissues. In addition,nutrient limitation may become more signiﬁcant later in the 
succession or the longer branches and taller stems of older treesmay increase resistance to the transpiration stream and thuslimit photosynthesis (Gower et al. , 1996). Trees characteristic of
different stages in succession show different patterns of NPP
with stand age. In a subalpine coniferous forest, for example, theearly successional whitebark pine ( Pinus albicaulis ) reached a
peak above-ground NPP at about 250 years and then declined,whereas the late successional, shade-tolerant subalpine ﬁr ( Abies
lasiocarpa ) continued towards a maximum beyond 400 years
(Figure 17.7). The late successional species allocated almosttwice as much biomass to leaves as its early successional coun-terpart, and maintained a high photosynthesis : respiration ratioto a greater age (Callaway et al. , 2000).
17.3 Factors limiting primary productivity in
terrestrial communities
Sunlight, carbon dioxide (CO2), water and soil nutrients are 
the resources required for primary production on land, while 
temperature, a condition, has a strong inﬂuence on the rate 
•• ••CLNet primary productivity (kg m–2 yr –1)2.0
0.0020.51.0
0.10.2
0.005 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.2 0.10.020.05
Biomass (kg m–2)0.5 1 2 5 10 20 50TerrestrialAquatic
OOCSUW
FWEABR
TGS
TA
DSDCLTSFSMTRF
TEF
TDF
BFWS
Forests
Grassland,shrubandscrubOO
CSUW
ABR
EFWSM
TRFTSF
TEF
TDFBFWS
STG
TA
DSDCLOpen ocean
Continental shelfUpwelling zone
Algal beds and reefs
EstuariesFreshwater lakesand streamsSwamp and marsh
Tropical rainforestTropical seasonal forest
Temperate evergreen forest
Temperate deciduous forestBoreal forestWoodland and scrubland
SavannaTemperate grassland
Tundra and alpine
Desert and semi-desertCultivated land
Figure 17.6 The relationship between average net primary productivity and average standing crop biomass for a range of ecosystems.
(Based on data in Whittaker, 1975.)
NPP : B ratios tend to
decrease duringsuccessionsEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 505506 CHAPTER 17
of photosynthesis. CO2is normally present at a level of around
0.03% of atmospheric gases. Turbulent mixing and diffusion 
prevent the CO2concentration from varying much from place to
place, except in the immediate neighborhood of a leaf, and CO2 probably plays little role in determining differences between
the productivities of different communities (although globalincreases in CO
2 concentration are expected to have profound 
effects (e.g. DeLucia et al. , 1999). On the other hand, the quality
•• ••ANPP (Mg DM ha–1 yr–1)8
6
5004
2
0
0 100 200 300 400
Stand age (years)Subalpine fir
Whitebark pineTotal
Figure 17.7 Annual above-ground 
net primary productivity (ANPP) (Mg dry
matter ha−1year−1) in stands of different
ages in a subalpine coniferous forest in Montana, USA: early successionalwhitebark pine, late successional subalpineﬁr, and total ANPP. (After Callaway 
et al. , 2000.)Table 17.3 Above-ground net primary productivity (ANPP) for forest age sequences in contrasting biomes. (After Gower et al. , 1996.)
Range of stand ages, ANPP (t dry mass ha−1year−1)
in years (no. of stands 
Biome/species Location shown in brackets) Peak Oldest % change
Boreal
Larix gmelinii Yakutsk, Siberia 50–380 (3) 4.9 2.4 −51
Picea abies Russia 22–136 (10) 6.2 2.6 −58
Cold temperate
Abies baisamea New York, USA 0–60 (6) 3.2 1.1 −66
Pinus contorta Colorado, USA 40–245 (3) 2.1 0.5 −76
Pinus densiﬂora Mt Mino, Japan 16–390 (7) 16.1 7.4 −54
Populus tremuloides Wisconsin, USA 8–83 (5) 11.1 10.7 −4
Populus grandidentata Michigan, USA 10–70 4.6 3.5 −24
Pseudotsuga menziesii Washington, USA 22–73 (4) 9.9 5.1 −45
Warm temperate
Pinus elliottii Florida, USA 2–34 (6) 13.2 8.7 −34
Pinus radiata Puruki, NZ (Tahi) 2–6 (5) 28.5 28.5 0
(Rue) 2–7 (6) 29.2 23.5 −20
(Toru) 2–8 (7) 31.1 31.1 0
Tropical
Pinus caribaea Afaka, Nigeria 5–15 (4) 19.2 18.5 −4
Pinus kesiya Meghalaya, India 1–22 (9) 30.1 20.1 −33
Tropical rainforest Amazonia 1–200 (8) 13.2 7.2 −45EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 506THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 507
and quantity of light, the availability of water and nutrients, and
temperature all vary dramatically from place to place. They are
all candidates for the role of limiting factor. Which of them actu-ally sets the limit to primary productivity?
17.3.1 Inefﬁcient use of solar energy
Depending on location, somethingbetween 0 and 5 joules of solar energystrikes each square meter of the earth’ssurface every minute. If all this were
converted by photosynthesis to plant biomass (that is, if photo-
synthetic efﬁciency were 100%) there would be a prodigiousgeneration of plant material, one or two orders of magnitudegreater than recorded values. However, much of this solarenergy is unavailable for use by plants. In particular, only about44% of incident shortwave radiation occurs at wavelengths suit-able for photosynthesis. Even when this is taken into account,though, productivity still falls well below the maximum possible.Photosynthetic efﬁciency has two components – the efﬁciency withwhich light is intercepted by leaves and the efﬁciency with which
intercepted light is converted by photosynthesis to new biomass(Stenberg et al. , 2001). Figure 17.8 shows the range in overall net
photosynthetic efﬁciencies (percentage of incoming photosyn-thetically active radiation (PAR) incorporated into above-groundNPP) in seven coniferous forests, seven deciduous forests and eightdesert communities studied as part of the International BiologicalProgramme (see Section 17.1). The conifer communities had thehighest efﬁciencies, but these were only between 1 and 3%. Fora similar level of incoming radiation, deciduous forests achieved0.5–1%, and, despite their greater energy income, deserts wereable to convert only 0.01–0.2% of PAR to biomass.
However, the fact that radiation is
not used efﬁciently does not in itself
imply that it does not limit communityproductivity. We would need to know whether at increased intensities
of radiation the productivity increased or remained unchanged.Some of the evidence given in Chapter 3 shows that the intensity of light during part of the day is below the optimum for canopy photosynthesis. Moreover, at peak light intensities, most canopies still have their lower leaves in relative gloom, andwould almost certainly photosynthesize faster if the light inten-sity were higher. For C
4 plants a saturating intensity of radiation
never seems to be reached, and the implication is that produc-
tivity may in fact be limited by a shortage of PAR even under thebrightest natural radiation.
There is no doubt, however, that what radiation is available
would be used more efﬁciently if other resources were in abund-
ant supply. The much higher values of community productivityrecorded from agricultural systems bear witness to this.17.3.2 Water and temperature as critical factors
The relationship between the NPP of 
a wide range of ecosystems on theTibetan Plateau and both precipitationand temperature is illustrated in Fig-ure 17.9. Water is an essential resource both as a constituent of 
cells and for photosynthesis. Large quantities of water are lost in transpiration – particularly because the stomata need to be open for much of the time for CO
2 to enter. It is not surprising
that the rainfall of a region is quite closely correlated with its 
productivity. In arid regions, there is an approximately linearincrease in NPP with increase in precipitation, but in the morehumid forest climates there is a plateau beyond which pro-
ductivity does not continue to rise. Note that a large amount of precipitation is not necessarily equivalent to a large amount ofwater available for plants; all water in excess of ﬁeld capacity willdrain away if it can. A positive relationship between productiv-ity and mean annual temperature can also be seen in Figure 17.9.However, the pattern can be expected to be complex because,for example, higher temperatures are associated with rapid waterloss through evapotranspiration; water shortage may then becomelimiting more quickly.
To unravel the relationships
between productivity, rainfall and
temperature, it is more instructive toconcentrate on a single ecosystem
•• ••De
De
DeDeDe
De
De
DeDDD D
DDDCCCCC
C
C
C
DDeConifer forest
Deciduous forest
DesertPhotosynthetic efficiency (%)
0.015
1,000,0000.51
0.10.2
0.020.05
Photosynthetically active radiation reaching
the community (kJ m–2 yr–1)2,000,000 3,000,000 4,000,0002
Figure 17.8 Photosynthetic efﬁciency (percentage of incoming
photosynthetically active radiation converted to above-ground net
primary productivity) for three sets of terrestrial communities inthe USA. (After Webb et al. , 1983.)terrestrial
communities useradiation inefﬁciently
productivity may still be limited by a shortage of PARshortage of watermay be a criticalfactor
interaction oftemperature andprecipitationEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 507508 CHAPTER 17
type. Above-ground NPP was estimated for a number of grass-
land sites along two west-to-east precipitation gradients in theArgentinian pampas. One of these gradients was in mountainouscountry and the other in the lowlands. Figure 17.10 shows therelationship between an index of above-ground NPP (ANPP) and
precipitation and temperature for the two sets of sites. There arestrong positive relationships between ANPP and precipitation butthe slopes of the relationships differed between the two envi-
ronmental gradients (Figure 17.10a).
The relationships between ANPP and temperature are simi-
lar for two further environmental gradients (both north-to-southelevation transects) in Figure 17.10b – both show a hump-shaped
pattern. This probably results from the overlap of two effects 
of increasing temperature: a positive effect on the length of the
•• ••0.4
0.3
100.2
0.1
0
– 2 0 468
Temperature ( °C)(b)
2Index of ANPP0.4
0.3
5000.2
0.1
0
100 200 300 400
Precipitation (mm yr–1)(a)
Figure 17.10 Annual above-ground net primary productivity (ANPP) of grasslands along two precipitation gradients in the Argentinian
pampas. NPP is shown as an index based on satellite radiometric measurements with a known relationship to absorbed photosynthet ically
active radiation in plant canopies. (a) NPP in relation to annual precipitation. (b) NPP in relation to annual mean temperature . Open
circles and diamonds represent sites along precipitation gradients in the lowland and mountainous regions respectively. Closed circles and
triangles represent sites along two elevation transects. (After Jobbagy et al. , 2002.)NPP (Mg DM ha–1 yr–1)
0
–541620
Annual mean temperature (
°C)812
15–1371101500
3006009001200
Annual mean
precipitation (mm)Figure 17.9 Relationship between 
total net primary productivity (Mg dry
matter ha−1year−1) and annual precipitation
and temperature for ecosystems on theTibetan Plateau. The ecosystems includeforests, woodlands, shrublands, grasslandsand desert. (After Luo et al. , 2002.)EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 508THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 509
growing season and a negative effect through increased evapo-
transpiration at higher temperatures. Because temperature is themain constraint on productivity at the cool end of the gradients,an increase in NPP is observed as we move from the coolest towarmer sites. However, there is a temperature value above
which the growing season does not lengthen and the dominat-ing effect of increasing temperature is now to increase evapo-transpiration, thus reducing water availability and curtailingNPP (Epstein et al. , 1997).
Water shortage has direct effects
on the rate of plant growth but also leads to the development of less densevegetation. Vegetation that is sparseintercepts less light (much of which
falls on bare ground). This wastage of solar radiation is the main
cause of the low productivity in many arid areas, rather than the reduced photosynthetic rate of drought-affected plants. Thispoint is made by comparing the productivity per unit weight ofleaf biomass instead of per unit area of ground for the studies shownin Figure 17.8. Coniferous forest produced 1.64 g g
−1year−1,
deciduous forest 2.22 g g−1year−1and desert 2.33 g g−1year−1.
17.3.3 Drainage and soil texture can modify water
availability and thus productivity
There was a notable difference in the slopes of the graphs of NPP
against precipitation for the mountainous and lowland sites inFigure 17.10. The slope was much lower in the mountainous caseand it seems likely that the steeper terrain in this region resultedin a higher rate of water runoff from the land and, thus, a lower
efﬁciency in the use of precipitation ( Jobbagy et al. , 2002).
A related phenomenon has been
observed when forest production onsandy, well-drained soils is comparedwith soils consisting of ﬁner particle
sizes. Data are available for the accumulation through time of forest biomass at a number of sites where all the trees had been removed by a natural disturbance or human clearance. Forforests around the world, Johnson et al. (2000) have reported the
relationship between above-ground biomass accumulation (a
rough index of ANPP) and accumulated growing season degree-days (stand age in years ×growing season temperature ×grow-
ing season as a proportion of the year). In effect, ‘growing seasondegree-days’ combine the time for which the stand has been accumulating biomass with the average temperature at the sitein question. Figure 17.11 shows that productivity of broadleaf forestsis generally much lower, for a given value for growing seasondegree-days, when the forest is on sandy soil. Such soils have less favorable soil-moisture-holding capacities and this accountsin some measure for their poorer productivity. In addition, however, nutrient retention may be lower in coarse soils, furtherreducing productivity compared to soils with ﬁner texture. This
was conﬁrmed by Reich et al. (1997) who, in their compilation of
data for 50 North American forests, found that soil nitrogenavailability (estimated as annual net nitrogen mineralization rate)was indeed lower in sandier soils and, moreover, that ANPP waslower per unit of available nitrogen in sandy situations.
17.3.4 Length of the growing season
The productivity of a community can be sustained only for thatperiod of the year when the plants have photosyntheticallyactive foliage. Deciduous trees have a self-imposed limit on theperiod when they bear foliage. In general, the leaves of decidu-ous species photosynthesize fast and die young, whereas evergreen
species have leaves that photosynthesize slowly but for longer(Eamus, 1999). Evergreen trees hold a canopy throughout the year,but during some seasons they may barely photosynthesize at allor may even respire faster than they photosynthesize. Evergreenconifers tend to dominate in nutrient-poor and cold conditions,perhaps because in other situations their seedlings are outcom-peted by their faster growing deciduous counterparts (Becker, 2000).
The latitudinal patterns in forest
productivity seen earlier (see Table 17.2)
are largely the result of differences in thenumber of days when there is activephotosynthesis. In this context, Black et al. (2000) measured net ecosystem pro-
ductivity (NEP) in a boreal deciduous forest in Canada for 4 years.First leaf emergence occurred considerably earlier in 1998 when
•• ••
Above-ground biomass (Mg ha–1)400
300
1000200
100
0
0 250 500 750
Growing season degree-years
Figure 17.11 Above-ground biomass accumulation (a rough
index of NPP) expressed as megagrams ( = 106g) per hectare 
in relation to accumulated growing season degree-days in
broadleaf forest stands growing on sandy or nonsandy soils. 
7, nonsandy soils; /H17033, sandy soils. (After Johnson et al. , 2000.)productivity and 
the structure of the canopy
soil texture caninﬂuence productivity
length of the growingseason: a pervasiveinﬂuence onproductivityEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 509510 CHAPTER 17
the April/May temperature was warmest (9.89°C) and a month
later in 1996 when the April/May temperature was coldest (4.24°C)(Figure 17.12a, b). Equivalent spring temperatures in 1994 and 1997were 6.67 and 5.93°C. The difference in the length of the growingseason in the four study years can be gauged from the pattern of
cumulative NEP (Figure 17.12c). During winter and early spring,NEP was negative because ecosystem respiration exceeded grossecosystem productivity. NEP became positive earlier in warmer
years (particularly 1998) so that overall total carbon sequesteredby the ecosystem in the four years was 144, 80, 116 and 290 g Cm
−2year−1for 1994, 1996, 1997 and 1998, respectively.
In our earlier discussion of the study of Argentinian pampas
communities (see Figure 17.10) we noted that higher NPP was
not only directly affected by precipitation and temperature but waspartly determined by length of the growing season. Figure 17.13
shows that the start of the growing season was positively relatedto mean annual temperature (paralleling the boreal forest studyabove), whereas the end of the growing season was determinedpartly by temperature but also by precipitation (it ended earlierwhere temperatures were high and precipitation was low). Againwe see a complex interaction between water availability andtemperature.
17.3.5 Productivity may be low because mineral
resources are deﬁcient
No matter how brightly the sun shines
and how often the rain falls, and no matter how equable the temperature is,productivity must be low if there is nosoil in a terrestrial community, or if the soil is deﬁcient in essen-
tial mineral nutrients. The geological conditions that determineslope and aspect also determine whether a soil forms, and theyhave a large, though not wholly dominant, inﬂuence on the min-eral content of the soil. For this reason, a mosaic of different levelsof community productivity develops within a particular climaticregime. Of all the mineral nutrients, the one that has the mostpervasive inﬂuence on community productivity is ﬁxed nitrogen(and this is invariably partly or mainly biological, not geological,in origin, as a result of nitrogen ﬁxation by microorganisms). There
is probably no agricultural system that does not respond toapplied nitrogen by increased primary productivity, and this maywell be true of natural vegetation as well. Nitrogen fertilizers addedto forest soils almost always stimulate forest growth.
The deﬁciency of other elements can also hold the productivity
of a community far below that of which it is theoretically capable. A classic example is deﬁciency of phosphate and zinc inSouth Australia, where the growth of commercial forest (Montereypine, Pinus radiata ) is made possible only when these nutrients
are supplied artiﬁcially. In addition, many tropical systems are primarily limited by phosphorus.
17.3.6 Résumé of factors limiting terrestrial productivity
The ultimate limit on the productivity of a community is determined
by the amount of incident radiation that it receives – without this,no photosynthesis can occur.
•• ••Leaf area index3
1(a)
2
Apr May Jun Sep Jul04
AugLeaf area index3
1(b)
2
Apr May Jun Sep Jul04
AugNEP (g C m–2)200(c)
0
MonthJan Mar Sep Dec Jul–200400
Aug Feb May Apr Nov Oct Jun1996199419981997
19961994
19981997
199619941998
1997
Figure 17.12 Seasonal patterns in leaf area index (area of leaves
divided by ground area beneath the foliage) of (a) overstory aspen
(Populus tremuloides ) and (b) understory hazelnut ( Corylus cornuta )
in a boreal deciduous forest during four study years withcontrasting spring temperatures. (c) Cumulative net ecosystem
productivity (NEP). (After Black et al. , 2000.)the crucial
importance ofnutrient availabilityEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 510THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 511
Incident radiation is used inefﬁciently by all communities.
The causes of this inefﬁciency can be traced to: (i) shortage 
of water restricting the rate of photosynthesis; (ii) shortage of essential mineral nutrients, which slows down the rate of production of photosynthetic tissue and its effectiveness in 
photosynthesis; (iii) temperatures that are lethal or too low forgrowth; (iv) an insufﬁcient depth of soil; (v) incomplete canopycover, so that much of the incident radiation lands on theground instead of on foliage (this may be because of seasonalityin leaf production and leaf shedding or because of defoliation by
grazing animals, pests and diseases); and (vi) the low efﬁciencywith which leaves photosynthesize – under ideal conditions,efﬁciencies of more than 10% (of PAR) are hard to achieve evenin the most productive agricultural systems. However, most of
the variation in primary productivity of world vegetation is due to factors (i) to (v), and relatively little is accounted for byintrinsic differences between the photosynthetic efﬁciencies of the leaves of the different species.
In the course of a year, the productivity of a community may
(and probably usually will) be limited by a succession of the fac-
tors (i) to (v). In a grassland community, for instance, the primaryproductivity may be far below the theoretical maximum becausethe winters are too cold and light intensity is low, the summersare too dry, the rate of nitrogen mobilization is too slow, and forperiods grazing animals may reduce the standing crop to a levelat which much incident light falls on bare ground.
•• ••
Growing season startNov 20
Oct 30
500Aug 31
100 200 300 400
Mean annual precipitation (mm)Oct 10
Sep 20(a)
Nov 20
Oct 30
10Aug 31
–2 0 6 8
Mean annual temperature ( °C)Oct 10
Sep 20Growing season startMay 20
Apr 30
500Apr 10
100 200 300 400
Mean annual precipitation (mm)(b)
Mean annual temperature ( °C)4 2
10 –2 0 6 8 4 2May 20
Apr 30
Apr 10
Figure 17.13 (a) Start and (b) end dates of the growing season for Argentinian pampas communities described in Section 17.3.2. 
Circles represent sites along the precipitation gradient in the mountainous region and triangles represent sites along the lowl and gradient.
(After Jobbagy et al. , 2002.)EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 511512 CHAPTER 17
17.4 Factors limiting primary productivity 
in aquatic communities
The factors that most frequently limit the primary productivity
of aquatic environments are the availability of light and nutrients.The most commonly limiting nutrients are nitrogen (usually asnitrate) and phosphorus (phosphate), but iron can be importantin open ocean environments.
17.4.1 Limitation by light and nutrients in streams
Streams ﬂowing through deciduousforests undergo marked transitions inprimary production by algae on thestream bed during the growing seasonas conditions shift from light-replete
early in spring to severely light-limited
when leaves develop on the overhanging trees. In a stream inTennessee, leaf emergence reduced PAR reaching the stream bedfrom more than 1000 to less than 30 µmol m
−2s−1(Hill et al. , 2001).
The reduction in PAR was paralleled by an equally dramatic fall
in stream GPP (Figure 17.14). This is despite a large increase inphotosynthetic efﬁciency from less than 0.3 to 2%; the higher efﬁ-ciencies arose both because existing taxa acclimated physiologic-
ally to low irradiances and because more efﬁcient taxa became dominant later in the season. Intriguingly, as PAR levels fell, theconcentration of both nitrate (Figure 17.14a) and phosphate rose.It seems that nutrients limited primary production when PAR wasabundant early in spring, with uptake by the algae reducing theconcentration in the water at this time. When light became limiting, however, the reduction in algal productivity meant thatless of the available nutrients were removed from the supply inthe ﬂowing water.
17.4.2 Nutrients in lakes
Like streams, lakes receive nutrients
by the weathering of rocks and soils intheir catchment areas, in the rainfalland as a result of human activity (fert-ilizers and sewage input). They vary
considerably in nutrient availability. A study of 12 Canadian lakes
shows a clear relationship between gross primary productivity (GPP)and phosphorus concentration and demonstrates the importanceof nutrients in limiting lake productivity (Figure 17.15). Note thatGPP easily exceeded ecosystem respiration in most lakes, empha-sizing the overriding importance of autochthonous production inthese lakes. The outlier in the top right corner of Figure 17.15bwas atypical of the study sites because it received sewage efﬂuent;here the allochthonous input of organic matter led to a higher
consumption than production of organic carbon in the lake.It is worth noting that the balance
of radiant energy relative to the avail-
ability of key nutrients can affect C : N: P ratios (stoichiometry) in the tissuesof primary producers. Thus, Sterner et al. (1997b) found in some phosphorus-
deﬁcient Canadian lakes that the avail-ability of PAR relative to total phosphorus (PAR : TP) affected 
the balance of carbon ﬁxation and phosphorus uptake in algal communities and, thereby, caused variations in C : P ratios in 
•• ••Gross primary production (g C m–2 day–1)0.7
0.5
0.1
Mar(b)
0
Apr May Jun
Month0.6
0.3PAR (mol m–2 day–1) (   )25
15
5(a)
020
10
0.20.4Mar Apr May Jun
Nitrate (µg N l–1) (   )100
60
080
40
20
1992
1993
Figure 17.14 (a) Photosynthetically active radiation (PAR)
reaching the bed of a Tennessee stream (bars) and stream water
nitrate concentration (circles) during the spring of 1992 (thepatterns were very similar in 1993). (b) Gross primary productivityin the stream during the spring in 1992 and 1993 (calculated on the
basis of whole stream diurnal changes in oxygen concentration).(After Hill et al. , 2001.)in small forest
streams, light andnutrients interact to determineproductivity
productivity in lakes . . .. . . shows a pervasiverole for nutrients . . .
. . . whose availabilitymay interact withradiant energy toaffect algal‘stoichiometry’ (C : N : P ratios)EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 512THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 513
living algal cells and algal detritus. The zooplankton that consume
live algae and the decomposers and detritivores that depend on
algal detritus each have speciﬁc nutrient requirements, and these
are very different from the nutrient ratios in algae. Thus, the changes
in algal stoichiometry noted by Sterner et al. have consequences
for heterotrophic metabolism and productivity. We consider
elsewhere how such imbalances between the stoichiometry of plant tissue and of its consumers affect food web interactions,decom position and nutrient cycling (see Sections 11.2.4, 17.5.4 
and 18.2.5).
17.4.3 Nutrients and the importance of upwellings 
in oceans
In the oceans, locally high levels of prim-
ary productivity are associated withhigh nutrient inputs from two sources.First, nutrients may ﬂow continuouslyinto coastal shelf regions from estuar-ies. An example is provided in Figure 17.16. Productivity in the
inner shelf region is particularly high both because of high nutri-ent concentrations and because the relatively clear water provides
a reasonable depth within which net photosynthesis is positive(the euphotic zone ). Closer to land, the water is richer in nutrients
but is highly turbid and its productivity is less. The least productivezones are on the outer shelf (and open ocean) where it might beexpected that primary productivity would be high because the wateris clear and the euphotic zone is deep. Here, however, productiv-
ity is low because of the extremely low concentrations of nutri-
ents.
Ocean upwellings are a second
source of high nutrient concentrations.
These occur on continental shelveswhere the wind is consistently parallel to, or at a slight angle to,the coast. As a result, water moves offshore and is replaced bycooler, nutrient-rich water originating from the bottom, wherenutrients have been accumulating by sedimentation. Strongupwellings can also occur adjacent to submarine ridges, as wellas in areas of very strong currents. Where it reaches the surface,
•• ••
Production (mg C m–3 day–1)1000
100
10
Total phosphorous (mg m–3)10 100Respiration (mg C m–2 day–1)1000
100
Gross photosynthesis (mg C m–2 day–1)100 1000(a)
(b)
May
JunJul
Aug
SepOctFigure 17.15 (a) Relationship between
the gross primary productivity of
phytoplankton (microscopic plants) in the open water of some Canadian lakes and phosphorus concentration. 
(b) The relationship between ecosystemrespiration and gross photosynthesismeasured on various dates in the studylakes. The dashed line shows whererespiration equals GPP. The solid lineshows the regression line for therelationship. Metabolic measurements were made in bottles in the laboratory at lake temperatures on depth-integrated
water samples taken from the ﬁeld. (After Carignan et al. , 2000.)
rich supplies of
nutrients in marineenvironments . . .. . . from estuaries . . .. . . and upwellingsEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 513•• ••514 CHAPTER 17
the nutrient-rich water sets off a bloom of phytoplankton pro-
duction. A chain of heterotrophic organisms takes advantage ofthe abundant food, and the great ﬁsheries of the world are locatedin these regions of high productivity.
Recently, iron has been identiﬁed
as a limiting nutrient that potentially
affects about one-third of the openocean (Geider et al. , 2001). Iron, which
is very insoluble in seawater, is ultimately derived from wind-blownparticulate material, and large areas of ocean receive insufﬁcient
amounts. When iron is added experimentally to ocean areas, massive blooms of phytoplankton can result (Coale et al. , 1996);
such blooms are also likely to occur when large storms supplyland-derived iron to the oceans.
While nutrients are the most inﬂu-
ential factors for local ocean product-
ivity, temperature and PAR also play arole at a larger scale (Figure 17.17).NPP (mg C m–2 day–1)104
103
102
–10 30(a)
101
01 0 2 0
SST ( °C)
NPP (mg C m–2 day–1)104
103
102
06 0(b)
101
20 40
PAR (mol photons m–2)+
+++++
+
++++
++
+
+
Figure 17.17 Relationships between daily depth-integrated estimates of net primary production (NPP) and: (a) sea surface temperature
(SST), and (b) above-water daily photosynthetically available radiation (PAR). The different symbols relate to different data s ets from
various oceans. (After Campbell et al. , 2002.)Net primary productivity
(g C m–2 yr–1)
0600
200
Outer shelf400
Inner shelfEstuary
20 km06
24
030
1020
Depth of euphotic zone (m)Index of nutrient concentrationNutrient concentrationDepth of euphotic zone
Phytoplankton productivity
Figure 17.16 Variation in phytoplankton
net primary productivity, nutrient
concentration and euphotic depth on atransect from the coast of Georgia, USA, to the edge of the continental shelf. 
(After Haines, 1979.)
iron as a limiting
factor in oceanstemperature and PAR also affectproductivityEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 514••THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 515
This has signiﬁcance for our ability to estimate ocean primary 
productivity because sea surface temperature and PAR (togetherwith surface chlorophyll concentration, another factor correlatedwith NPP) can be measured using satellite telemetry.
17.4.4 Productivity varies with depth in aquatic
communities
Although the concentration of a limitingnutrient usually determines the pro-ductivity of aquatic communities onan areal basis, in any given water body
there is also considerable variation with depth as a result of
attenuation of light intensity. Figure 17.18a shows how GPPdeclines with depth. The depth at which GPP is just balanced by phytoplankton respiration, R, is known as the compensationpoint. Above this, NPP is positive. Light is absorbed by watermolecules as well as by dissolved and particulate matter, and it declines exponentially with depth. Near the surface, light is superabundant, but at greater depths its supply is limited and lightintensity ultimately determines the extent of the euphotic zone.Very close to the surface, particularly on sunny days, there may evenbe photoinhibition of photosynthesis. This seems to be due largelyto radiation being absorbed by the photosynthetic pigments at sucha rate that it cannot be used via the normal photosynthetic chan-
nels, and it overﬂows into destructive photo-oxidation reactions.
The more nutrient-rich a water body is, the shallower its
euphotic zone is likely to be (Figure 17.18b). This is not really aparadox. Water bodies with higher nutrient concentrations usu-ally possess a greater biomasses of phytoplankton that absorb lightand reduce its availability at greater depth. (This is exactly ana-logous to the shading inﬂuence of the tree canopy in a forest, whichmay remove up to 98% of the radiant energy before it can reach
the ground layer vegetation or, as we saw above, a stream bed.)Even quite shallow lakes, if sufﬁciently fertile, may be devoid ofwater weeds on the bottom because of shading by phytoplankton.The relationships shown in Figure 17.18a and b are derived fromlakes but the pattern is qualitatively similar in ocean environments(Figure 17.19).
••Net primary
productivity(NPP)Light intensity
Respiration (R)Compensation point
(depth of euphotic
zone wher GPP = R)
Depth
ZeuGross primary productivity (GPP)
RDepth (m)
Zeu(i) GPP
NPP
RZeu(ii) GPP
NPP
R(iii) GPP
NPP
Zeu(a)
100(b)
5
15100
5
15100
5
15Figure 17.18 (a) The general relationship
with depth, in a water body, of gross
primary productivity (GPP), respiratoryheat loss (R) and net primary productivity(NPP). The compensation point (or depth
of the euphotic zone, eu) occurs at thedepth ( Z
eu) where GPP just balances R 
and NPP is zero. (b) Total NPP increases
with nutrient concentration in the water(lake iii >ii>i). Increasing fertility itself 
is responsible for greater biomasses of
phytoplankton and a consequent decreasein the depth of the euphotic zone.
phytoplankton
productivity varieswith depthEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 515516 CHAPTER 17
17.5 The fate of energy in ecosystems
Secondary productivity is deﬁned as the rate of production of 
new biomass by heterotrophic organisms. Unlike plants, hetero-trophic bacteria, fungi and animals cannot manufacture fromsimple molecules the complex, energy-rich compounds theyneed. They derive their matter and energy either directly by 
consuming plant material or indirectly from plants by eatingother heterotrophs. Plants, the primary producers, comprise theﬁrst trophic level in a community; primary consumers occur atthe second trophic level; secondary consumers (carnivores) at thethird, and so on.
17.5.1 Relationships between primary and 
secondary productivity
Since secondary productivity depends on
primary productivity, we should expecta positive relationship between thetwo variables in communities. Turningagain to the stream study described in Section 17.4.1, recall that primary productivity declined 
dramatically during the summer when a canopy of tree leaves above the stream shaded out most of the incident radiation. A principal grazer of the algal biomass is the snail Elimia 
clavaeformis . Figure 17.20a shows how the growth rate of indi-
vidual snails in the stream was lowest in the summer; there 
was a statistically signiﬁcant positive relationship between snail growth and monthly stream bed PAR (Hill et al. , 2001). 
Figure 17.20b–d illustrates the general relationship between primary and secondary productivity in aquatic and terrestrialexamples. Secondary productivity by zooplankton, which principally consume phytoplankton cells, is positively related tophytoplankton productivity in a range of lakes in different partsof the world (Figure 17.20b). The productivity of heterotrophic
bacteria in lakes and oceans also parallels that of phytoplankton(Figure 17.20c); they metabolize dissolved organic matterreleased from intact phytoplankton cells or produced as a resultof ‘messy feeding’ by grazing animals. Figure 17.20d shows how the productivity of Geospiza fortis (one of Darwin’s ﬁnches),
measured in terms of average brood size on an island in theGalápagos archipelago, is related to annual rainfall, itself anindex of primary productivity.
•• ••Depth (mm)20
60(c)
40
Chlorophyll (mg m–3)(d)
Chlorophyll (mg m–3)(e)
Chlorophyll (mg m–3)36 9 1 5 12 3 6 9 15 1220
604020
6040Depth (mm)20
60(a)
40(b)
36 9 1 5 12 3 6 9 15 1220
6040Depth (mm)20
60(c)
40
Chlorophyll (mg m–3)(d)
Chlorophyll (mg m–3)(e)
Chlorophyll (mg m–3)36 9 1 5 12 3 6 9 15 1220
604020
6040Depth (mm)20
60(a)
40(b)
36 9 1 5 12 3 6 9 15 1220
6040
36 9 1 5 12 36 9 1 5 12
Figure 17.19 Examples of vertical chlorophyll proﬁles recorded in the ocean off the coast of Namibia. Example (a) is typical of locations
associated with ocean upwelling: as cold upwelled water warms up, a surface phytoplankton bloom develops, reducing light penetr ation
and thus productivity in deeper water. Example (b) illustrates how peak abundance can shift to deeper water as a surface bloom in an
upwelling area depletes the nutrient concentrations there. The surface phytoplankton bloom in example (c) is less dramatic than  in (a)
(perhaps reﬂecting lower nutrient concentrations in the upwelling water); as a result, chlorophyll concentration remains relati vely high 
to a greater depth. Examples (d) and (e) are for locations where nutrient concentrations are much lower. (After Silulwane et al. , 2001.)
there is a general
positive relationshipbetween primary and secondary productivityEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 516THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 517
A general rule in both aquatic and
terrestrial ecosystems is that secondary
productivity by herbivores is approxim-ately an order of magnitude less thanthe primary productivity upon which it
is based. This is a consistent feature of all grazer systems: that
part of the trophic structure of a community that depends, at itsbase, on the consumption of living plant biomass (in the ecosys-
tem context we use ‘grazer’ in a different sense to its deﬁnitionin Chapter 9). It results in a pyramidal structure in which the pro-ductivity of plants provides a broad base upon which a smallerproductivity of primary consumers depends, with a still smallerproductivity of secondary consumers above that. Trophic levelsmay also have a pyramidal structure when expressed in terms of
density or biomass. (Elton (1927) was the ﬁrst to recognize thisfundamental feature of community architecture and his ideas werelater elaborated by Lindemann (1942).) But there are manyexceptions. Food chains based on trees will certainly have largernumbers (but not biomass) of herbivores per unit area than of 
plants, while chains dependent on phytoplankton productionmay give inverted pyramids of biomass, with a highly productivebut small biomass of short-lived algal cells maintaining a largerbiomass of longer lived zooplankton.
The productivity of herbivores is invariably less than that of
the plants on which they feed. Where has the missing energy gone?First, not all of the plant biomass produced is consumed alive byherbivores. Much dies without being grazed and supports the
decomposer community (bacteria, fungi and detritivorous animals).Second, not all plant biomass eaten by herbivores (nor herbivorebiomass eaten by carnivores) is assimilated and available forincorporation into consumer biomass. Some is lost in feces, and
this also passes to the decomposers. Third, not all energy that hasbeen assimilated is actually converted to biomass. A proportionis lost as respiratory heat. This occurs both because no energyconversion process is ever 100% efﬁcient (some is lost as unus-able random heat, consistent with the second law of thermody-namics) and also because animals do work that requires energy,again released as heat. These three energy pathways occur at alltrophic levels and are illustrated in Figure 17.21.
17.5.2 Possible pathways of energy ﬂow through 
a food web
Figure 17.22 provides a complete
description of the trophic structure ofa community. It consists of the grazersystem pyramid of productivity, butwith two additional elements of realism.
Most importantly, it adds a decomposer system – this is invariably
coupled to the grazer system in communities. Secondly, it recog-nizes that there are subcomponents of each trophic level in each
•• ••
Number of broods4(d)
0
In(rainfall)388
6
2
4567Snail growth (µg day–1)
100(a)
0
MonthJM S D J200
A FM AN O J150
50
y = 1.433 x – 4.308
r2 = 0.879Bacterial productivity
(mg C m–2 day–1)
Net primary productivity
(mg C m–2 day–1)5000 25,000600
15,000 10,0000
20,000(c)
60Seawater
Fresh water
Zooplankton production (kJ m–2)
2000(b)
500
Phytoplankton production per
growing season (kJ m–2)5000 25,0003000
15,000 10,0002500
1500
1000
0
20,000Figure 17.20 (a) Seasonal pattern of 
snail growth (mean increase in weight of
individually marked snails during a monthon the stream bed ± SE). The open circle
represents growth at a nearby unshaded
stream site in June. (After Hill et al. , 2001.)
(b) Relationship between primary andsecondary productivity for zooplankton in lakes. (After Brylinsky & Mann, 1973.)(c) Relationship between bacterial andphytoplankton productivity in fresh waterand seawater. (After Cole et al. 1988.) 
(d) Mean clutch size of Geospiza fortis in
relation to annual rainfall (positively
related to primary productivity); the open circles are for particularly wet yearswhen El Niño weather events occurred.(After Grant et al. , 2000.).
most primary
productivity does notpass through thegrazer system
alternative pathwaysthat energy can tracethrough thecommunityEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 517518 CHAPTER 17
subsystem that operate in different ways. Thus a distinction is made
between microbes and detritivores that occupy the same trophiclevel and utilize dead organic matter, and between consumers of microbes (microbivores) and of detritivores. Displayed inFigure 17.22 are the possible routes that a joule of energy, ﬁxedin net primary production, can take as it is dissipated on its paththrough the community. A joule of energy may be consumed andassimilated by a herbivore that uses part of it to do work and loses
•• ••Dead organic matter
compartment ofdecomposer systemNot consumedP
n
AnRn
InFn
Pn – 1Productivity at trophic level n
Respiratory heat loss at
trophic level n
Fecal energy loss at trophiclevel n
Energy intake at trophic level n
Energy assimilated at trophic
level n
Productivity available forconsumption from trophiclevel n – 1P
n
AnRn
InFn
Pn – 1
Figure 17.21 The pattern of energy ﬂow
through a trophic compartment.
DOM NPPDMMiC2
C1C1C2C2
H HBodies and feces
RRR
C1C1 RRR
C2
Bodies and fecesPrimary carnivore
Secondary carnivoreDetritivore
Dead organic matter
HerbivoreMicroorganismsMicrobivoreNet primary production
RespirationC1
C2D
DOM
HMMiNPP
R
Figure 17.22 A generalized model of
trophic structure and energy ﬂow through
a food web. (After Heal & MacLean, 1975.)EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 518THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 519
it as respiratory heat. Or it might be consumed by a herbivore
and later assimilated by a carnivore that dies and enters the deadorganic matter compartment. Here, what remains of the joule may be assimilated by a fungal hypha and consumed by a soil mite, which uses it to do work, dissipating a further part of 
the joule as heat. At each consumption step, what remains of the joule may fail to be assimilated and may pass in the feces to be dead organic matter, or it may be assimilated and respired,or assimilated and incorporated into the growth of body tissue(or the production of offspring – as in the case of broods of thebird in Figure 17.20d). The body may die and what remains ofthe joule enter the dead organic matter compartment, or it maybe captured alive by a consumer in the next trophic level whereit meets a further set of possible branching pathways. Ultimately,
each joule will have found its way out of the community, dissip-ated as respiratory heat at one or more of the transitions in itspath along the food chain. Whereas a molecule or ion may cycleendlessly through the food chains of a community, energy passesthrough just once.
The possible pathways in the grazer and decomposer sys-
tems are the same, with one critical exception – feces and dead bodies are lost to the grazer system (and enter the decomposersystem), but feces and dead bodies from the decomposer systemare simply sent back to the dead organic matter compartment atits base. This has a fundamental signiﬁcance. The energy availableas dead organic matter may ﬁnally be completely metabolized –and all the energy lost as respiratory heat – even if this requires
several circuits through the decomposer system. The exceptionsto this are situations where: (i) matter is exported out of the localenvironment to be metabolized elsewhere, for example detrituswashed out of a stream; and (ii) local abiotic conditions are veryunfavorable to decomposition processes, leaving pockets ofincompletely metabolized high-energy matter, otherwise knownas oil, coal and peat.
17.5.3 The importance of transfer efﬁciencies in
determining energy pathways
The proportions of net primary pro-
duction that ﬂow along each of thepossible energy pathways depend ontransfer efﬁciencies in the way energy is
used and passed from one step to the
next. A knowledge of the values of justthree categories of transfer efﬁciency is
all that is required to predict the pattern of energy ﬂow. Theseare consumption efﬁciency (CE) assimilation efﬁciency (AE) and pro-
duction efﬁciency (PE).
consumption efﬁciency, CE=I
n/Pn−1×100.Repeated in words, CE is the percentage of total productivity
available at one trophic level (Pn−1) that is actually consumed
(‘ingested’) by a trophic compartment ‘one level up’ (In). For 
primary consumers in the grazer system, CE is the percentage 
of joules produced per unit time as NPP that ﬁnds its way intothe guts of herbivores. In the case of secondary consumers, it isthe percentage of herbivore productivity eaten by carnivores. The
remainder dies without being eaten and enters the decomposerchain.
Various reported values for the consumption efﬁciencies of 
herbivores are shown in Figure 17.23. Most of the estimates areremarkably low, usually reﬂecting the unattractiveness of muchplant material because of its high proportion of structural sup-port tissue, but sometimes also as a consequence of generally lowherbivore densities (because of the action of their natural enemies).The consumers of microscopic plants (microalgae growing on beds
or free-living phytoplankton) can achieve greater densities, haveless structural tissue to deal with and account for a greater per-centage of primary production. Median values for consumptionefﬁciency are less than 5% in forests, around 25% in grasslandsand more than 50% in phytoplankton-dominated communities.We know much less about the consumption efﬁciencies of car-nivores feeding on their prey, and any estimates are speculative.Vertebrate predators may consume 50–100% of production from
•• ••
Percentage of NPP consumed by herbivores
0.1
NPP (g C m–2 day–1)10–4100
10
1
10–21
Figure 17.23 Relationship between the percentage of net 
primary production (NPP) consumed by herbivores and net
primary productivity. 7, phytoplankton; /H17033, benthic microalgae; 
4, macroalgal beds; /H17004, freshwater macrophyte meadows; 
/H17039, seagrass meadows; /H17009, marshes; 5, grasslands; 2, mangroves; 
6, forests. (Data from a number of sources, compiled 
by Cebrian, 1999.)
the relative
importance of energypathways depends on three transferefﬁciencies: . . .
. . . consumptionefﬁciency, . . .EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 519520 CHAPTER 17
vertebrate prey but perhaps only 5% from invertebrate prey.
Invertebrate predators consume perhaps 25% of available invertebrate prey production.
assimilation efﬁciency, 
AE=A
n/In×100.
Assimilation efﬁciency is the percentage of food energy taken
into the guts of consumers in a trophic compartment (In) that is
assimilated across the gut wall (An) and becomes available for incor-
poration into growth or to do work. The remainder is lost as feces
and enters the base of the decomposer system. An ‘assimilationefﬁciency’ is much less easily ascribed to microorganisms. Fooddoes not enter an invagination of the outside world passing
through the microorganism’s body (like the gut of a higherorganism) and feces are not produced. In the sense that bacteriaand fungi typically assimilate effectively 100% of the deadorganic matter they digest externally and absorb, they are oftensaid to have an ‘assimilation efﬁciency’ of 100%.
Assimilation efﬁciencies are typically low for herbivores,
detritivores and microbivores (20–50%) and high for carnivores(around 80%). In general, animals are poorly equipped to deal withdead organic matter (mainly plant material) and living vegetation,
no doubt partly because of the very widespread occurrence of phys-ical and chemical plant defenses, but mainly as a result of the highproportion of complex structural chemicals such as cellulose andlignin in their make-up. As Chapter 11 describes, however, manyanimals contain a symbiotic gut microﬂora that produces cellulaseand aids in the assimilation of plant organic matter. In one sense,these animals have harnessed their own personal decomposer system. The way that plants allocate production to roots, wood,leaves, seeds and fruits inﬂuences their usefulness to herbivores.Seeds and fruits may be assimilated with efﬁciencies as high as60–70%, and leaves with about 50% efﬁciency, while the assim-ilation efﬁciency for wood may be as low as 15%. The animal food of carnivores (and detritivores such as vultures that con-
sume animal carcasses) poses less of a problem for digestion and
assimilation.
production efﬁciency, 
PE=P
n/An×100.
Production efﬁciency is the percentage of assimilated energy
(An) that is incorporated into new biomass (Pn). The remainder
is entirely lost to the community as respiratory heat. (Energy-rich
secretory and excretory products, which have taken part inmetabolic processes, may be viewed as production, P
n, and
become available, like dead bodies, to the decomposers.)
Production efﬁciency varies mainly according to the taxo-
nomic class of the organisms concerned. Invertebrates in generalhave high efﬁciencies (30–40%), losing relatively little energy in
respiratory heat and converting more assimilate to production.Amongst the vertebrates, ectotherms (whose body temperature
varies according to environmental temperature) have inter-mediate values for PE (around 10%), whilst endotherms, with theirhigh energy expenditure associated with maintaining a constanttemperature, convert only 1–2% of assimilated energy into pro-duction. The small-bodied endotherms have the lowest efﬁcien-cies, with the tiny insectivores (e.g. wrens and shrews) having thelowest production efﬁciencies of all. On the other hand, micro-organisms, including protozoa, tend to have very high productionefﬁciencies. They have short lives, small size and rapid popula-tion turnover. Unfortunately, available methods are not sensitiveenough to detect population changes on scales of time and spacerelevant to microorganisms, especially in the soil. In general,
efﬁciency of production increases with size in endotherms anddecreases very markedly in ectotherms.
trophic level transfer efﬁciency,TLTE =P
n/Pn−1×100.
The overall trophic transfer efﬁ-
ciency from one trophic level to the next is simply CE ×AE×PE.
In the period after Lindemann’s (1942) pioneering work, it was generally assumed that trophic transfer efﬁciencies werearound 10%; indeed some ecologists referred to a 10% ‘law’.However, there is certainly no law of nature that results in precisely one-tenth of the energy that enters a trophic leveltransferring to the next. For example, a compilation of trophicstudies from a wide range of freshwater and marine environ-ments revealed that trophic level transfer efﬁciencies variedbetween about 2 and 24%, although the mean was 10.13%(Figure 17.24).
•• ••Number of cases
040
23035
15
61 0 1 6
Tropic level transfer efficiency (%)245
20 1420
1025
Figure 17.24 Frequency distribution of trophic-level transfer
efﬁciencies in 48 trophic studies of aquatic communities. There 
is considerable variation among studies and among trophic levels. The mean is 10.13 % (SE =0.49). (After Pauly & 
Christensen, 1995.). . . assimilation
efﬁciency . . .
. . . and productionefﬁciency . . .. . . which combine togive trophic leveltransfer efﬁciencyEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 520THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 521
17.5.4 Energy ﬂow through contrasting communities
Given accurate values for net primary
productivity (NPP) in an ecosystem,and CE, AE and PE for the varioustrophic groupings shown in the modelin Figure 17.22, it should be possible 
to predict and understand the relative
importance of the different possible energy pathways. Perhaps notsurprisingly, no study has incorporated all ecosystem compartmentsand all transfer efﬁciencies of the component species. However,some generalizations are possible when the gross features ofcontrasting systems are compared (Figure 17.25). Thus, thedecomposer system is probably responsible for the majority of sec-ondary production, and therefore respiratory heat loss, in everycommunity in the world. The grazer system has its greatest role
in plankton communities, where a large proportion of NPP is con-sumed alive and assimilated at quite a high efﬁciency. Even here,though, it is now clear that very high densities of heterotrophicbacteria in the plankton community subsist on dissolved organicmolecules excreted by phytoplankton cells, perhaps consumingmore than 50% of primary productivity as ‘dead’ organic matterin this way (Fenchel, 1987a). The grazer system holds little sway
in terrestrial communities because of low herbivore consumptionand assimilation efﬁciencies, and it is almost nonexistent in manysmall streams and ponds simply because primary productivity isso low. The latter depend for their energy base on dead organicmatter produced in the terrestrial environment that falls or iswashed or blown into the water. The deep-ocean benthic com-
munity has a trophic structure very similar to that of streams and
ponds (all can be described as heterotrophic communities). In thiscase, the community lives in water too deep for photosynthesisto be appreciable or even to take place at all, but it derives itsenergy base from dead phytoplankton, bacteria, animals andfeces that sink from the autotrophic community in the euphoticzone above. From a different perspective, the ocean bed is equiv-alent to a forest ﬂoor beneath an impenetrable forest canopy.
We can move from the relatively
gross generalizations above to consider
in Figure 17.26 a greater range of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems (datacompiled from over 200 publishedreports by Cebrian, 1999). Figure 17.26aﬁrst shows the range of values for NPP
•• ••Grazer
system
NPPDecomposer
system
DOMRespiration Respiration(c) Plankton communityGrazer
system
NPPDecomposer
system
DOMRespiration Respiration(a) Forest
Grazer
system
NPPDecomposer
system
DOMRespiration Respiration(b) Grassland
GSDecomposer
system
DOMRespirationRespiration(d) Stream community
From terrestrial catchmentNPP
Figure 17.25 General patterns of energy ﬂow for: (a) a forest, (b) a grassland, (c) a marine plankton community, and (d) the community
of a stream or small pond. The relative sizes of the boxes and arrows are proportional to the relative magnitudes of compartmen ts and
ﬂows. DOM, dead organic matter; NPP, net primary production.
relative roles 
of grazer anddecomposer systemsin contrastingcommunities
grazer consumptionefﬁciencies arehighest where plantshave low C : N and C : P ratiosEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 521522 CHAPTER 17
in a variety of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Figure 17.26b
re-emphasizes how consumption efﬁciency by grazers is part-icularly low in ecosystems where plant biomass contains con-siderable support tissue and relatively low amounts of nitrogenand phosphorus (i.e. forests, shrublands and mangroves). Plant
biomass not consumed by herbivores becomes detritus and con-tributes by far the largest proportion to the dead organic matter(DOM) box in Figure 17.25. Not surprisingly, the percentage ofNPP destined to be detritus is highest in forests and lowest in phy-toplankton and benthic microalgal communities (Figure 17.26c).Plant biomass from terrestrial communities is not only unpalat-able to herbivores, it is also relatively more difﬁcult for decom-posers and detritivores to deal with. Thus, Figure 17.26d showsthat a greater proportion of primary production accumulates as
refractory detritus (persisting for more than a year) in forests, shrub-lands, grasslands and freshwater macrophyte meadows. Finally,Figure 17.26e shows the percentage of NPP that is exported outof the systems. The values are generally modest (medians of 20%or less) indicating that, in most cases, the majority of biomass produced in an ecosystem is consumed or decomposed there. 
The most obvious exceptions are mangroves and, in particular,macroalgal beds (which often inhabit rocky shores), where relat-ively large proportions of plant biomass are displaced and movedaway by storm and tidal action.
In general then, communities composed of plants whose stoi-
chiometry represents a higher nutritional status (higher nitrogen
and phosphorus concentrations, i.e. lower C : N and C : P) losea higher percentage to herbivores, produce a smaller proportionof detritus, experience faster decomposition rates and, in con-sequence, accumulate less refractory detritus and have smaller stores of dead organic carbon (Cebrian, 1999).
The presentation of information in
Figure 17.26 emphasizes spatial pat-
terns in the way energy moves throughthe world’s ecosystems. However, weshould not lose sight of the temporal patterns that exist in the balancebetween production and consumption
•• ••Forests and shrublands
MangrovesGrasslands
Marshes
Seagrass meadowsFreshwater macrophyte meadows
Macroalgal beds
Benthic microalgal bedsPhytoplanktonic communities
10
–410–21 0 40 80
NPP (g C m–2 day–1) Percentage of NPP
consumed by herbivores
10 40 80 04 0 8 0
Percentage of NPP
channeled as detritusPercentage of NPP
accumulated as refractory detritusForests and shrublandsMangrovesGrasslandsMarshesSeagrass meadowsFreshwater macrophyte meadowsMacroalgal bedsBenthic microalgal bedsPhytoplanktonic communities
04 0 8 0
Percentage of NPP exported(c) (d) (e)(b) (a)
Figure 17.26 Box plots showing for a range of ecosystem types: (a) net primary productivity (NPP), (b) percentage of NPP consumed 
by detritivores, (c) percentage of NPP channeled as detritus, (d) percentage of NPP accumulated as refractory detritus, and (e)  percentage
of NPP exported. Boxes encompass 25 and 75% quartiles and the central lines represents the median of a number of studies. 
(After Cebrian, 1999.)
temporal patterns in
the balance betweenproduction andconsumption oforganic matterEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 522THE FLUX OF ENERGY THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 523
of organic matter. Figure 17.27 shows how GPP, RE (the sum of
autotrophic and heterotrophic respiration) and net ecosystemproductivity (NEP) varied seasonally during 5 years of study ofa boreal aspen ( Populus tremuloides ) forest in Canada. Total annual
GPP (the area under the GPP curves in Figure 17.27a) was high-
est in 1998 when the temperature was high (probably the resultof an El Niño event – see below) and lowest in 1996 when thetemperature was particularly low. Annual variations in GPP (e.g.1 4 1 9gCm
−2in 1998, 118 7gCm−2in 1996) were large compared
to variations in RE (113 2gCm−2and 110 6gCm−2, respectively)
because the occurrence of warm springs caused photosynthesis
to increase faster than respiration. This led overall to higher val-ues of NEP in warmer years (29 0gCm
−2in 1998, 8 0gCm−2in
1996). Note how NEP is negative (RE exceeds GPP and carbonstores are being used by the community) except in the summermonths when GPP consistently exceeds RE. At this site, thecumulative annual values for NEP were always positive, indicat-
ing that more carbon is ﬁxed than is respired each year and theforest is a carbon sink. However, this is not true for all eco-systems every year (Falge et al. , 2002).
The aspen forest discussed above 
is by no means the only ecosystemwhere annual variations in energy ﬂuxmay be due to climatic cycles such asthe El Niño–Southern Oscillation
(ENSO; see also Section 2.4.1). ENSO events occur sporadically
but typically occur every 3–6 years. During such events, the tem-perature may be signiﬁcantly higher in some locations and lowerin others and, just as signiﬁcantly, rainfall can be 4–10 times higherin some areas (Holmgren et al. , 2001). The El Niño has been correlated with dramatic changes in aquatic ecosystems (even lead-
ing to the collapse of ﬁsheries; Jordan, 1991). More recently, ithas become obvious that the El Niño can cause major changeson land too. Figure 17.28 shows the annual variation in caterpil-lar numbers on the Galápagos Islands in a standard census con-ducted in various years since 1977, plotted on the same graph asannual rainfall. The remarkably strong correlation comes aboutbecause of the dependence of caterpillar numbers on primary pro-ductivity, which itself is considerably higher in wet years. We saw
in Figure 17.20d how the total number of broods of the ﬁnchGeospiza fortis was much greater in the four ENSO years (open
circles in that ﬁgure). This reﬂects the much greater productionin very wet years of the seeds, fruits and caterpillars that they feedon. Not only do the ﬁnches increase the number of broods, butalso the size of their clutches and the probability of successful rear-ing to the ﬂedging stage.
Our growing knowledge of the impact of ENSO events on
energy ﬂux through ecosystems suggests that the predicted
changes in extreme weather events expected as a result ofhuman-induced global climate change will profoundly alterecosystem processes in many parts of the world, a topic to whichwe will return in Chapter 22.
But next we turn to the ﬂux of matter through ecosystems,
recognizing that the rate at which resources are supplied and usedby autotrophs and heterotrophs depends fundamentally on the
supply of nutrients (Chapter 18). We shall see later how ecosys-tem productivity helps determine the consequences of competit-ive and predator–prey interactions for community composition(Chapter 19), food web ecology (Chapter 20) and species richness(Chapter 21).
•• ••010
Year1994 1996 1998 1999 1997 1995(c)010
1994 1996 1998 1999 1997 1995(b)010
1994 1996 1998 1999 1997 1995(a)NEP
(g C m–2 day–1)RE
(g C m–2 day–1)GPP
(g C m–2 day–1)
Figure 17.27 Monthly mean values for:
(a) gross primary productivity (GPP), 
(b) ecosystem respiration (RE), and (c) netecosystem productivity (NEP) in a Canadianaspen forest. (After Arain et al. , 2002.)
consequences of the
ENSO for ecosystemenergeticsEIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 523524 CHAPTER 17
Summary
The term ecosystem is used to denote the biological community
(primary producers, decomposers, detritivores, herbivores, etc.)together with the abiotic environment in which it is set. Lindemannlaid the foundations of a science of ecological energetics by con-sidering the efﬁciency of transfer between trophic levels – from
incident radiation received by a community through its captureby green plants in photosynthesis to its subsequent use by heterotrophs. This is the topic of the present chapter.
The bodies of the living organisms within a unit area con-
stitute a standing crop of biomass. Primary productivity is the rate at which biomass is produced per unit area by plants. The total ﬁxation of energy by photosynthesis is gross primary pro-ductivity (GPP), a proportion of which is respired by the plantsas autotrophic respiration (RA). The difference between GPP and
RA is net primary productivity (NPP) and represents the actualrate of production of new biomass that is available for con-sumption by heterotrophic organisms. The rate of production of biomass by heterotrophs is secondary productivity, and their respiration is heterotrophic respiration (HE). Net ecosystem pro-ductivity (NEP) is GPP minus total respiration (RA +RH).
We discuss the broad patterns in primary productivity across
the face of the globe and in relation to seasonal and annual variations in conditions, and note that primary productivity :biomass ratios are higher in aquatic than terrestrial communities.The factors that limit terrestrial primary productivity are solar
energy (and particularly its inefﬁcient use by plants), water andtemperature (and their complex interactions), soil texture anddrainage, and mineral nutrient availability. The length of the grow-ing season is particularly inﬂuential. In aquatic environments, primary productivity depends in particular on the availability of solar radiation (with strong patterns related to water depth)
and nutrients (especially important are human inputs to lakes, 
estuarine inputs to oceans and ocean upwelling zones).
Unlike plants, heterotrophic bacteria, fungi and animals can-
not manufacture from simple molecules the complex, energy-rich compounds they need. They derive their matter and energyeither directly by consuming plant material or indirectly from plantsby eating other heterotrophs. There is a general positive relation-ship between primary and secondary productivity in ecosystems,
but most primary production passes, when dead, through the detritus system  rather than as living material through the grazingsystem. The pathways traced by energy through communities are determined by three energy transfer efﬁciencies (consumption,assimilation and production efﬁciencies). Grazer consumptionefﬁciencies are highest where plants have little structural supporttissue and low C : N and C : P ratios. We discuss temporal patternsin the balance between primary productivity and its consumptionby heterotrophs, and show that broad climatic patterns (such asEl Niño) can profoundly inﬂuence ecosystem energetics.
••075100
50
Year25
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998Number of caterpillars (   )
Rainfall (mm) (    )1500
1000500
0
Figure 17.28 Annual variation in mean
caterpillar numbers ( ±SE; /H17033) in a standard
census against a histogram of annual
rainfall on the Galápagos island of Daphne Major. (After Grant et al. , 2000.)EIPC17  10/24/05  2:12 PM  Page 524••18.1 Introduction
Chemical elements and compounds are vital for the processes 
of life. Living organisms expend energy to extract chemicalsfrom their environment, they hold on to them and use them fora period, then lose them again. Thus, the activities of organismsprofoundly inﬂuence the patterns of ﬂux of chemical matter in
the biosphere. Physiological ecologists focus their attention on howindividual organisms obtain and use the chemicals they need (seeChapter 3). However, in this chapter, as in the last, we changethe emphasis and consider the ways in which the biota on an areaof land, or within a volume of water, accumulates, transforms andmoves matter between the various components of the ecosystem.The area that we choose may be that of the whole globe, a con-tinent, a river catchment or simply a square meter.
18.1.1 Relationships between energy ﬂux and 
nutrient cycling
The great bulk of living matter in any community is water. The
rest is made up mainly of carbon compounds (95% or more) and this is the form in which energy is accumulated and stored.The energy is ultimately dissipated when the carbon compoundsare oxidized to carbon dioxide (CO
2) by the metabolism of living 
tissue or of its decomposers. Although we consider the ﬂuxes ofenergy and carbon in different chapters, the two are intimatelybound together in all biological systems.
Carbon enters the trophic structure of a community when 
a simple molecule, CO
2, is taken up in photosynthesis. If it
becomes incorporated in net primary productivity, it is availablefor consumption as part of a molecule of sugar, fat, protein or,very often, cellulose. It follows exactly the same route as energy,being successively consumed, defecated, assimilated and perhaps
incorporated into secondary productivity somewhere within oneof the trophic compartments. When the high-energy molecule in
which the carbon is resident is ﬁnally used to provide energy forwork, the energy is dissipated as heat (as we have discussed inChapter 17) and the carbon is released again to the atmosphere
as CO
2. Here, the tight link between energy and carbon ends.
Once energy is transformed into
heat, it can no longer be used by living
organisms to do work or to fuel the synthesis of biomass. (Its only possible
role is momentary, in helping to main-tain a high body temperature.) The heat is eventually lost to theatmosphere and can never be recycled. In contrast, the carbon inCO
2can be used again in photosynthesis. Carbon, and all other
nutrient elements (e.g. nitrogen, phosphorus, etc.) are available
to plants as simple inorganic molecules or ions in the atmosphere(CO
2), or as dissolved ions in water (nitrate, phosphate, potassium,
etc.). Each can be incorporated into complex organic carboncompounds in biomass. Ultimately, however, when the carboncompounds are metabolized to CO
2, the mineral nutrients are
released again in simple inorganic form. Another plant may thenabsorb them, and so an individual atom of a nutrient element may pass repeatedly through one food chain after another. Therelationship between energy ﬂow and nutrient cycling is illustrated
in Figure 18.1.
By its very nature, then, each joule of energy can be used 
only once, whereas chemical nutrients, the building blocks ofbiomass, simply change the form of molecule of which they arepart (e.g. nitrate-N to protein-N to nitrate-N). They can be usedagain, and repeatedly recycled. Unlike the energy of solar radia-tion, nutrients are not in unalterable supply, and the process oflocking some up into living biomass reduces the supply remain-ing to the rest of the community. If plants, and their consumers,
were not eventually decomposed, the supply of nutrients wouldbecome exhausted and life on the planet would cease. The activityof heterotrophic organisms is crucial in bringing about nutrientenergy cannot be
cycled and reused;matter can . . .
Chapter 18
The Flux of Matter 
through EcosystemsEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 525526 CHAPTER 18
cycling and maintaining productivity. Figure 18.1 shows the release
of nutrients in their simple inorganic form as occurring only fromthe decomposer system. In fact, some is also released from thegrazer system. However, the decomposer system plays a role ofoverwhelming importance in nutrient cycling.
The picture described in Figure 18.1
is an oversimpliﬁcation in one import-
ant respect. Not all nutrients releasedduring decomposition are necessarilytaken up again by plants. Nutrient
recycling is never perfect and some nutrients are exported fromland by runoff into streams (ultimately to the ocean) and others,such as nitrogen and sulfur, that have gaseous phases, can be lostto the atmosphere. Moreover, a community receives additional
supplies of nutrients that do not depend directly on inputs fromrecently decomposed matter – minerals dissolved in rain, for example, or derived from weathered rock.
18.1.2 Biogeochemistry and biogeochemical cycles
We can conceive of pools of chemical
elements existing in compartments.Some compartments occur in the
atmosphere (carbon in CO
2, nitrogen as gaseous nitrogen, etc.), some
in the rocks of the lithosphere (calcium as a constituent of calcium
carbonate, potassium in feldspar) and others in the hydrosphere –
the water in soil, streams, lakes or oceans (nitrogen in dissolvednitrate, phosphorus in phosphate, carbon in carbonic acid, etc.).
In all these cases the elements exist in an inorganic form. In con-trast, living organisms (the biota) and dead and decaying bodiescan be viewed as compartments containing elements in an organic
form (carbon in cellulose or fat, nitrogen in protein, phosphorusin adenosine triphosphate, etc.). Studies of the chemical processesoccurring within these compartments and, more particularly, ofthe ﬂuxes of elements between them, comprise the science of biogeochemistry.
Many geochemical ﬂuxes would occur in the absence of 
life, if only because all geological formations above sea level areeroding and degrading. Volcanoes release sulfur into the atmo-sphere whether there are organisms present or not. On the otherhand, organisms alter the rate of ﬂux and the differential ﬂux ofthe elements by extracting and recycling some chemicals from the
underlying geochemical ﬂow (Waring & Schlesinger, 1985). Theterm biogeochemistry is apt.
The ﬂux of matter can be investig-
ated at a variety of spatial and temporalscales. Ecologists interested in the gains,uses and losses of nutrients by thecommunity of a small pond or a hectare of grassland can focuson local pools of chemicals. They need not concern themselveswith the contribution to the nutrient budget made by volcanoes
or the possible fate of nutrients leached from land to eventually bedeposited on the ocean ﬂoor. At a larger scale, we ﬁnd that thechemistry of streamwater is profoundly inﬂuenced by the biotaof the area of land it drains (its catchment area; see Section 18.2.4)and, in turn, inﬂuences the chemistry and biota of the lake, estuaryor sea into which it ﬂows. We deal with the details of nutrientﬂuxes through terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in Sections 18.2and 18.3. Other investigators are interested in the global scale.
With their broad brush they paint a picture of the contents andﬂuxes of the largest conceivable compartments – the entire
•• ••Grazer
system
NPPDecomposer
system
DOMRespiratory
heat loss
Radiant solar
energyRespiratory
heat loss
Figure 18.1 Diagram to show the
relationship between energy ﬂow (pale
arrows) and nutrient cycling. Nutrientslocked in organic matter (dark arrows) aredistinguished from the free inorganic state
(white arrow). DOM, dead organic matter;NPP, net primary production.
. . . but nutrient
cycling is neverperfect
biogeochemistry can be studied atdifferent scales
the ‘bio’ inbiogeochemistryEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 526THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 527
atmosphere, the oceans as a whole, and so on. Global biogeo-
chemical cycles will be discussed in Section 18.4.
18.1.3 Nutrient budgets
Nutrients are gained and lost by ecosystems in a variety of ways(Figure 18.2). We can construct a nutrient budget by identifyingand measuring all the processes on the credit and debit sides ofthe equation. For some nutrients, in some ecosystems, the budgetmay be more or less in balance.
In other cases, the inputs exceed the
outputs and nutrients accumulate in the
compartments of living biomass anddead organic matter. This is especiallyobvious during community succession(see Section 17.4).
Finally, outputs may exceed inputs if the biota is disturbed by
an event such as ﬁre, massive defoliation (such as that caused by aplague of locusts) or large-scale deforestation or crop harvesting
by people. Another important source of loss in terrestrial systemsoccurs where mineral export (e.g. of base cations due to acid rain)exceeds replenishment from weathering.
The components of nutrient budgets are discussed below.18.2 Nutrient budgets in terrestrial communities
18.2.1 Inputs to terrestrial communities
Weathering of parent bedrock and 
soil is generally the dominant source ofnutrients such as calcium, iron, magne-sium, phosphorus and potassium, whichmay then be taken up via the roots of
plants. Mechanical weathering is caused by processes such as freezing of water and the growth of roots in crevices. However,much more important to the release of plant nutrients are chem-ical weathering processes. Of particular signiﬁcance is carbonation,in which carbonic acid (H
2CO3) reacts with minerals to release ions,
such as calcium and potassium. Simple dissolution of minerals 
in water also makes nutrients available from rock and soil, andso do hydrolytic reactions involving organic acids released by theectomycorrhizal fungi (see Section 13.8.1) associated with plant
roots (Figure 18.3).
Atmospheric CO
2is the source of the
carbon content of terrestrial commun-
ities. Similarly, gaseous nitrogen fromthe atmosphere provides most of the nitrogen content of com-munities. Several types of bacteria and blue-green algae possess
•• ••inputs sometimes
balance outputs . . .but not alwaysnutrient inputs . . .. . . from theweathering of rockand soil, . . .
. . . from theatmosphere, . . .Figure 18.2 Components of the nutrient
budgets of a terrestrial and an aquatic
system. Note how the two communitiesare linked by stream ﬂow, which is a majoroutput from the terrestrial system and a
major input to the aquatic one. Inputs areshown in color and outputs in black.
Gaseous
emission
Wetfall
and
dryfall
Solution and
emission of
gasesNitrogen
fixation and
denitrificationAerosol
loss
Groundwater
dischargeGroundwater
Stream flow
to estuariesand oceansLoss to and release
from sedimentGaseous
absorptionWetfall Dryfall
Denitrification
and othersoil reactionsNitrogen
fixation
Chemical
weathering ofrock and soil
Stream flowStreamflowEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 527••528 CHAPTER 18
the enzyme nitrogenase and convert atmospheric nitrogen to 
soluble ammonium (NH4+) ions, which can then be taken up
through the roots and used by plants. All terrestrial ecosystemsreceive some available nitrogen through the activity of free-livingbacteria, but communities containing plants such as legumes and alder trees ( Alnus spp.), with their root nodules containing
symbiotic nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria (see Section 13.10), may receive
a very substantial proportion of their nitrogen in this way. Morethan 80 kg ha
−1year−1of nitrogen was supplied to a stand of 
alder by biological nitrogen ﬁxation, for example, compared with
1–2 kg ha−1year−1from rainfall (Bormann & Gordon, 1984); and
nitrogen ﬁxation by legumes can be even more dramatic: valuesin the range 100–300 kg ha
−1year−1are not unusual.
Other nutrients from the atmosphere
become available to communities aswetfall (in rain, snow and fog) or dryfall
(settling of particles during periods with-
out rain, and gaseous uptake). Rain is not pure water but contains
chemicals derived from a number of sources: (i) trace gases, suchas oxides of sulfur and nitrogen; (ii) aerosols produced when tinywater droplets from the oceans evaporate in the atmosphere andleave behind particles rich in sodium, magnesium, chloride andsulfate; and (iii) dust particles from ﬁres, volcanoes and windstorms,often rich in calcium, potassium and sulfate. The constituents of rainfall that serve as nuclei for raindrop formation make upthe rainout component, whereas other constituents, both par-
ticulate and gaseous, are cleansed from the atmosphere as the rain
falls – these are the washout component (Waring & Schlesinger,1985). The nutrient concentrations in rain are highest early in a
rainstorm, but fall subsequently as the atmosphere is progressivelycleansed. Snow scavenges chemicals from the atmosphere less effectively than rain, but tiny fog droplets have particularly highionic concentrations. Nutrients dissolved in precipitation mostlybecome available to plants when the water reaches the soil andcan be taken up by the plant roots. However, some are absorbedby leaves directly.
Dryfall can be a particularly important process in commun-
ities with a long dry season. In four Spanish oak forests ( Quercus
pyrenaica ) situated along a rainfall gradient, for example, dryfall
sometimes accounted for more than half of the atmospheric input
to the tree canopy of magnesium, manganese, iron, phosphorus,potassium, zinc and copper (Figure 18.4). For most elements, the importance of dryfall was more marked in forests in drier environments. However, dryfall was not insigniﬁcant for forestsin wetter locations. Figure 18.4 also plots for each nutrient theannual forest demand (annual increase in above-ground biomassmultiplied by the mineral concentration in the biomass). Annualdeposition of many elements in wetfall and dryfall was much greater than needed to satisfy demand (e.g. Cl, S, Na, Zn). Butfor other elements, and especially for forests in dryer environ-ments, annual atmospheric inputs more or less matched demand(e.g. P, K, Mn, Mg) or were inadequate (N, Ca). Of course ele-ment deﬁcits would be greater if root productivity had been 
taken into account, and other sources of nutrient input must beparticularly signiﬁcant for a number of these elements.
While we may conceive of wetfall and dryfall inputs arriv-
ing vertically, part of the pattern of nutrient income to a forestdepends on its ability to intercept horizontally driven air-bornenutrients. This was demonstrated for mixed deciduous forests in New York State when the aptly named Weathers et al. (2001)
showed that inputs of sulfur, nitrogen and calcium at the forestedge were 17–56% greater than in its interior. The widespread
tendency for forests to become fragmented as a result of humanactivities is likely to have had unexpected consequences for theirnutrient budgets because more fragmented forests have a greaterproportion of edge habitat.
Streamwater plays a major role in 
the output of nutrients from terrestrialecosystems (see Section 18.3). However,in a few cases, stream ﬂow can provide a signiﬁcant input to 
terrestrial communities when, after ﬂooding, material is depositedin ﬂoodplains.
Last, and by no means least, human
activities contribute signiﬁcant inputs of nutrients to many communities. Forexample, the amounts of CO
2and oxides of nitrogen and sulfur
in the atmosphere have been increased by the burning of fossil
fuels, and the concentrations of nitrate and phosphate in stream-water have been raised by agricultural practices and sewage disposal. These changes have far-reaching consequences, which
will be discussed later.
••
Organic
acid
Figure 18.3 Ectomycorrhizal fungi associated with tree roots can
mobilize phosphorus, potassium, calcium and magnesium from
solid mineral substrates through organic acid secretion, and thesenutrients then become available to the host plant via the fungalmycelium. (After Landeweert et al. , 2001.)
. . . as wetfall 
and dryfall, . . .. . . from hydrologicalinputs . . .
. . . and from humanactivitiesEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 528•• ••WF DF ND
Nitrogen (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S110
S2 S3 S451520Chlorine (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S110
S2 S3 S4515Sulfur (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S14
S2 S3 S428
6
Phosphorus (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S11.0
S2 S3 S40.51.52.0Sodium (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S14
S2 S3 S426
Potassium (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S1 S2 S3 S4246810Magnesium (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S13
S2 S3 S414
Calcium (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S1 S2 S3 S420406080Manganese (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S10.4
S2 S3 S40.20.6
Zinc (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S1 S2 S3 S40.51.01.52.0Iron (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S10.2
S2 S3 S40.10.3
Copper (kg ha–1 yr–1)
0
S1 S2 S3 S40.10.20.82
Figure 18.4 Annual atmospheric
deposition as wetfall (WF) and dryfall (DF)
compared to annual nutrient demand (ND;to account for above-ground tree growth)for four oak forests along a rainfall 
gradient (S1 wettest, S4 driest) in Spain.(After Marcos & Lancho, 2002.)EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 529530 CHAPTER 18
18.2.2 Outputs from terrestrial communities
A particular nutrient atom may be
taken up by a plant that is then eatenby a herbivore which then dies and is
decomposed, releasing the atom back to the soil from where itis taken up through the roots of another plant. In this manner,
nutrients may circulate within the community for many years.Alternatively, the atom may pass through the system in a matterof minutes, perhaps without interacting with the biota at all.Whatever the case, the atom will eventually be lost through oneof the variety of processes that remove nutrients from the sys-tem (see Figure 18.2). These processes constitute the debit sideof the nutrient budget equation.
Release to the atmosphere is one
pathway of nutrient loss. In many com-
munities there is an approximate annualbalance in the carbon budget; the carbon
ﬁxed by photosynthesizing plants is balanced by the carbonreleased to the atmosphere as CO
2from the respiration of plants,
microorganisms and animals. Other gases are released through
the activities of anaerobic bacteria. Methane is a well-knownproduct of the soils of bogs, swamps and ﬂoodplain forests, produced by bacteria in the waterlogged, anoxic zone of wetland
soils. However, its net ﬂux to the atmosphere depends on the rateat which it is produced in relation to its rate of consumption byaerobic bacteria in the shallower, unsaturated soil horizons, withas much as 90% consumed before it reaches the atmosphere (Bubier & Moore, 1994). Methane may be of some importance indrier locations too. It is produced by fermentation in the anaerobicstomachs of grazing animals, and even in upland forests, periodsof heavy rainfall may produce anaerobic conditions that can persist for some time within microsites in the organic layer of 
the soil (Sexstone et al. , 1985). In such locations, bacteria such as
Pseudomonas reduce nitrate to gaseous nitrogen or N
2O in the pro-
cess of denitriﬁcation. Plants themselves may be direct sources
of gaseous and particulate release. For example, forest canopiesproduce volatile hydrocarbons (e.g. terpenes) and tropical foresttrees emit aerosols containing phosphorus, potassium and sulfur
(Waring & Schlesinger, 1985). Finally, ammonia gas is releasedduring the decomposition of vertebrate excreta and has been shown to be a signiﬁcant component in the nutrient budget ofmany systems (Sutton et al. , 1993).
Other pathways of nutrient loss are important in particular
instances. For example, ﬁre can turn a very large proportion ofa community’s carbon into CO
2in a very short time. The loss 
of nitrogen as volatile gas can be equally dramatic: during an 
intense wild ﬁre in a conifer forest in northwest USA, 855 kg ha−1
(equal to 39% of the pool of organic nitrogen) was lost in thisway (Grier, 1975). Substantial losses of nutrients also occur when foresters or farmers harvest and remove their trees and crops.For many elements, the most
important pathway of loss is in stream
ﬂow. The water that drains from the soil of a terrestrial community, via thegroundwater, into a stream carries a load of nutrients that is partly dissolved and partly particulate. With the exception of iron and phosphorus, which are not mobile in soils, the loss ofplant nutrients is predominantly in solution. Particulate matterin stream ﬂow occurs both as dead organic matter (mainly treeleaves) and as inorganic particles. After rainfall or snowmelt thewater draining into streams is generally more dilute than duringdry periods, when the concentrated waters of soil solution makea greater contribution. However, the effect of high volume morethan compensates for lower concentrations in wet periods. Thus,total loss of nutrients is usually greatest in years when rainfall and stream discharge are high. In regions where the bedrock ispermeable, losses occur not only in stream ﬂow but also in waterthat drains deep into the groundwater. This may discharge intoa stream or lake after a considerable delay and at some distancefrom the terrestrial community.
18.2.3 Carbon inputs and outputs may vary with 
forest age
Law et al. (2001) compared patterns of carbon storage and ﬂux
in a young (clear cut 22 years previously) and an old forest (not
previously logged, trees from 50 to 250 years old) of ponderosapine ( Pinus ponderosa ) in Oregon, USA. Their results are sum-
marized in Figure 18.5.
Total ecosystem carbon content
(vegetation, detritus and soil) of the
old forest was about twice that of itsyoung counterpart. There were notabledifferences in percentage carbon storedin living biomass (61% in old, 15% in young) and in dead woodon the forest ﬂoor (6% in old, 26% in young). These differencesreﬂect the inﬂuence of soil organic matter and woody debris in the young forest derived from the prelogged period of its 
history. As far as living biomass is concerned, the old forest contained more than 10 times as much as the young forest, withthe biggest difference in the wood component of tree biomass.
Below-ground primary productivity differed little between
the two forests but because of a much lower above-ground net primary productivity (ANPP) in the young forest, total net primary productivity (NPP) was 25% higher in the old forest. Shrubs accounted for 27% of ANPP in the young forest, but only10% in the old forest. Heterotrophic respiration (decomposers,detritivores and other animals) was somewhat lower in the oldforest than NPP, indicating that this forest is a net sink for carbon.In the young forest, however, heterotrophic respiration exceededNPP making this site a net source of CO
2to the atmosphere. In
•• ••nutrients can 
be lost . . .
. . . to theatmosphere . . .. . . and togroundwater and streams
an old forest is a net sink for carbon(input greater thanoutput) . . .EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 530THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 531
both forests, respiration from the soil
community accounted for 77% of totalheterotrophic respiration.
These results provide a good illustra-
tion of the pathways, stores and ﬂuxes
of carbon in forest communities. They also serve to emphasize
that nutrient inputs and outputs are by no means always in balance in ecosystems.
18.2.4 Importance of nutrient cycling in relation to
inputs and outputs
Because many nutrient losses from
terrestrial communities are channeledthrough streams, a comparison of thechemistry of streamwater with that ofincoming precipitation can reveal a lot
about the differential uptake and cycling of chemical elements by
the terrestrial biota. Just how important is nutrient cycling in rela-tion to the through-put of nutrients? Is the amount of nutrientscycled per year small or large in comparison with external suppliesand losses? The most thorough study of this question has beencarried out by Likens and his associates in the Hubbard BrookExperimental Forest, an area of temperate deciduous forest drainedby small streams in the White Mountains of New Hampshire, USA. The catchment area – the extent of terrestrial environment
drained by a particular stream – was taken as the unit of studybecause of the role that streams play in nutrient export. Six smallcatchments were deﬁned and their outﬂows were monitored. Anetwork of precipitation gauges recorded the incoming amounts
of rain, sleet and snow. Chemical analyses of precipitation andstreamwater made it possible to calculate the amounts of various
nutrients entering and leaving the system, and these are shown
in Table 18.1. A similar pattern is found each year. In most cases,the output of chemical nutrients in stream ﬂow is greater than theirinput from rain, sleet and snow. The source of the excess chem-icals is parent rock and soil, which are weathered and leached ata rate of about 70 g m
−2year−1.
In almost every case, the inputs 
and outputs of nutrients are small in
comparison with the amounts held inbiomass and recycled within the system.
Nitrogen, for example, was added to the system not only in precipitation
•• ••. . . whereas a young
forest is a net carbonsource (outputgreater than input)
the movement ofwater links terrestrialand aquaticcommunities
Hubbard Brook –forest inputs andoutputs are smallcompared to internalcyclingOld forest
NPP
472
270444
Rh
10,521
1923 12331325
533016NPP
Rh357Young forest
7082535
563
431032251960389 Figure 18.5 Annual carbon budgets for
an old and a young ponderosa pine forest.
Carbon storage ﬁgures are in g C m−2
while net primary productivity (NPP) and heterotrophic respiration (R
h) are 
in g C m−2year−1 (arrows). The numbers
above ground represent carbon storage intree foliage, in the remainder of forestbiomass, in understory plants, and in deadwood on the forest ﬂoor. The numbers just
below the ground surface are for tree rootsand litter. The lowest numbers are for soilcarbon. (After Law et al. , 2001.)
Table 18.1 Annual nutrient budgets for forested catchments 
at Hubbard Brook (kg ha
−1year−1). Inputs are for dissolved
materials in precipitation or as dryfall. Outputs are losses in
streamwater as dissolved material plus particulate organic matter.(After Likens et al. , 1971.)
NH4+NO3−K+Ca2+Mg2+Na+
Input 2.7 16.3 1.1 2.6 0.7 1.5
Output 0.4 8.7 1.7 11.8 2.9 6.9Net change * +2.3 +7.6 −0.6 −9.2 −2.2 −5.4
*Net change is positive when the catchment gains matter and negative
when it loses it.EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 531532 CHAPTER 18
(6.5 kg ha−1year−1) but also through atmospheric nitrogen ﬁxation
by microorganisms (14 kg ha−1year−1). (Note that denitriﬁcation
by other microorganisms, releasing nitrogen to the atmosphere,
will also have been occurring but was not measured.) The export in streams of only 4 kg ha
−1year−1emphasizes how securely
nitrogen is held and cycled within the forest biomass. Stream out-put represents only 0.1% of the total nitrogen standing crop heldin living and dead forest organic matter. Nitrogen was unusualin that its net loss in stream runoff was less than its input in pre-
cipitation, reﬂecting the complexity of inputs and outputs and the efﬁciency of its cycling. However, despite the net loss to theforest of other nutrients, their export was still low in relation tothe amounts bound in biomass. In other words, relatively efﬁcientrecycling is the norm.
In a large-scale experiment, all the
trees were felled in one of the HubbardBrook catchments and herbicides wereapplied to prevent regrowth. The
overall export of dissolved inorganicnutrients from the disturbed catch-ment then rose to 13 times the normal
rate (Figure 18.6). Two phenomena were responsible. First, theenormous reduction in transpiring surfaces (leaves) led to 40%
more precipitation passing through the groundwater to be discharged to the streams, and this increased outﬂow causedgreater rates of leaching of chemicals and weathering of rock and soil. Second, and more signiﬁcantly, deforestation effect-ively broke the within-system nutrient cycling by uncoupling the decomposition process from the plant uptake process. In theabsence of nutrient uptake in the spring, when the deciduous trees would have started production, the inorganic nutrients
released by decomposer activity were available to be leached inthe drainage water.
The main effect of deforestation was on nitrate-N, emphasiz-
ing the normally efﬁcient cycling to which inorganic nitrogen issubject. The output of nitrate in streams increased 60-fold afterthe disturbance. Other biologically important ions were alsoleached faster as a result of the uncoupling of nutrient cycling mechanisms (potassium: 14-fold increase; calcium: sevenfold
increase; magnesium: ﬁvefold increase). However, the loss ofsodium, an element of lower biological signiﬁcance, showed a muchless dramatic change following deforestation (2.5-fold increase).Presumably it is cycled less efﬁciently in the forest and so uncoupling had less effect.
•• ••deforestation
uncouples cyclingand leads to a loss of nutrients
Concentration (mg l–1)
011.0
10.0
9.0
8.07.06.05.04.03.02.01.0
Ca2+Deforested catchment
Control catchment
04.03.02.01.0K
+
04.03.02.01.020406080
1965JJA S O N DJF M A M JJA S O N DJF M A M JJA S O N DJF M A M
1966
Year1967 1968NO3–Figure 18.6 Concentrations of ions in
streamwater from the experimentally
deforested catchment and a controlcatchment at Hubbard Brook. The timingof deforestation is indicated by arrows.
Note that the ‘nitrate’ axis has a break in it.(After Likens & Borman, 1975.)EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 532THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 533
18.2.5 Some key points about nutrient budgets in
terrestrial ecosystems
The examples discussed above have
illustrated that ecosystems do not generally have balanced inputs andoutputs of nutrients. However, in
many cases (as in the Hubbard Brook Forest) nutrients such as
nitrogen are cycled quite tightly, and inputs and outputs aresmall compared to stored pools. For carbon too, ﬂuxes may besmall compared to storage, but note that tight cycling is not therule in this case; the carbon molecules in respired CO
2will rarely
be the same ones taken up by photosynthesis (because of the 
huge pool of CO2involved).
We have also seen that nutrient budgets of a single category
of ecosystem can differ dramatically, either because of internalproperties (the age of trees in the pine forests in Section 18.2.3) orexternal factors (the dryness of the climate in the oak forests in
Figure 18.4). Similarly, in a semiarid grassland in Colorado, nitrogenavailability to grass plants adjacent to actively growing roots wasgreater in months when there was more rainfall (Figure 18.7).
Many other factors inﬂuence nutri-
ent ﬂux rates and stores. For example,the stoichiometry of elements in foliage(and thus in detritus when the leaves die) can inﬂuence decomposition ratesand nutrient ﬂux (see Section 11.2.4).
There is a theoretical critical detritus C : N ratio of 30 : 1 above
which bacteria and fungi are nitrogen-limited, when they then take up exogenous ammonium and nitrate ions from the soil, competing with plants for these resources (Daufresne & Loreau,2001). When the C : N ratio is below 30 : 1, the microbes are 
carbon-limited and decomposition increases soil inorganic nitrogen,which may in turn increase plant nitrogen uptake (Kaye & Hart,1997). In general, plants are most often nitrogen-limited andmicrobes carbon-limited, and whilst microbes are more signiﬁcantin the control of nitrogen cycling, it is the plants that regulate carbon inputs which control microbial activity (Knops et al. , 2002).
A quite different chemical pro-
perty of foliage may have an equally dramatic effect. Polyphenols are a very
widely distributed class of secondarymetabolites in plants that often provide protection against attack;their evolution is usually interpreted in terms of defense againstherbivores. However, the polyphenols in detritus can alsoinﬂuence the ﬂux of soil nutrients (Hattenschwiler & Vitousek,2000). Different classes of polyphenols have been found to affectfungal spore germination and hyphal growth. They have also been shown to inhibit nitrifying bacteria and to suppress or, in
some cases, stimulate symbiotic nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria. Finally,polyphenols may restrict the activity and abundance of soil detri-tivores. Overall, polyphenols may tend to reduce decompositionrates (as they decrease herbivory rates) with important con-sequences for nutrient ﬂuxes, but more work is needed on thistopic (Hattenschwiler & Vitousek, 2000).
18.3 Nutrient budgets in aquatic communities
When attention is switched from terrestrial to aquatic com-
munities, there are several important distinctions to be made. In particular, aquatic systems receive the bulk of their supply of nutrients from stream inﬂow (see Figure 18.2). In stream andriver communities, and also in lakes with a stream outﬂow,
export in outgoing stream water is a major factor. By contrast,in lakes without an outﬂow (or where this is small relative to thevolume of the lake), and also in oceans, nutrient accumulationin permanent sediments is often the major export pathway.
18.3.1 Streams
We noted, in the case of Hubbard
Brook, that nutrient cycling within theforest was great in comparison tonutrient exchange through import and export. By contrast, onlya small fraction of available nutrients take part in biological 
interactions in stream and river communities (Winterbourn &Townsend, 1991). The majority ﬂows on, as particles or dissolvedin the water, to be discharged into a lake or the sea. Nevertheless,some nutrients do cycle from an inorganic form in streamwaterto an organic form in biota to an inorganic form in streamwater,and so on. But because of the inexorable transport downstream,
•• ••diversity of patterns
of nutrient input andoutput
decomposition andnutrient ﬂux . . .. . . inﬂuenced bystoichiometry . . .. . . and plant defensechemicals
nutrient ‘spiraling’ instreams
3.000.046
Precipitation (mm day–1)0.52
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5Available N (mg m–2 day–1)
Figure 18.7 Nitrogen available to actively growing roots of 
the bunchgrass Bouteloua gracilis in shortgrass steppe ecosystems 
in relation to precipitation in the study period. The values for 
the six sampling periods are the averages of eight replicate plots. 
/H17033, downslope plots; 7, upslope plots (up to 11 m further up the
same hillslope). (After Hook & Burke, 2000.)EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 533••534 CHAPTER 18
the displacement of nutrients is better represented as a spiral
(Elwood et al. , 1983), where fast phases of inorganic nutrient 
displacement alternate with periods when the nutrient is locked in biomass at successive locations downstream (Figure 18.8).Bacteria, fungi and microscopic algae, growing on the substratum
of the stream bed, are mainly responsible for the uptake of inorganic nutrients from streamwater in the biotic phase of spiraling. Nutrients, in organic form, pass on through the food
web via invertebrates that graze and scrape microbes from the substratum (grazer–scrapers – see Figure 11.5). Ultimately,decomposition of the biota releases inorganic nutrient molecules
and the spiral continues. The concept of nutrient spiraling is equallyapplicable to ‘wetlands’, such as backwaters, marshes and alluvialforests, which occur in the ﬂoodplains of rivers. However, in thesecases spiraling can be expected to be much tighter because ofreduced water velocity (Prior & Johnes, 2002).
A dramatic example of spiraling occurs when the larvae of
blackﬂies (collector–ﬁlterers; see Figure 11.5) use their modiﬁedmouthparts to ﬁlter out and consume ﬁne particulate organic matter which otherwise would be carried downstream. Becauseof very high densities (sometimes as many as 600,000 blackﬂy larvae per square meter of river bed) a massive quantity of ﬁneparticulate matter may be converted by the larvae into fecal pellets (estimated at 429 t dry mass of fecal pellets per day in a
Swedish river; Malmqvist et al. , 2001). Fecal pellets are much larger
than the particulate food of the larvae and so are much more likelyto settle out on the river bed, especially in slower ﬂowing sec-tions of river (Figure 18.9). Here they provide organic matter asfood for many other detritivorous species.
18.3.2 Lakes
In lakes, it is usually the phytoplankton
and their consumers, the zooplankton,which play the key roles in nutrientcycling. However, most lakes are inter-connected with each other by rivers, and
standing stocks of nutrients are determined only partly by processeswithin the lakes. Their position with respect to other water bodiesin the landscape can also have a marked effect on nutrient status.This is well illustrated for a series of lakes connected by a river thatultimately ﬂows into Toolik Lake in arctic Alaska (Figure 18.10a).
••WetlandWetland
Figure 18.8 Nutrient spiraling in a river channel and adjacent
wetland areas. (After Ward, 1988.)
37.5
6.312.120.526.7
32.136.1
30.431.0
9.9
6.136.133.131.525.3
23.6
0.336.6500
400300
200
100
0
400 300 200Number of fecal pellets (l–1)
Distance from confluence (km)100 0ConfluenceRapids Runs
Figure 18.9 Downstream trends in the Vindel River
in Sweden (shown as distance from the conﬂuence
with the larger Ume River) in the concentration offecal pellets (number of fecal pellets per liter ±SE) 
of blackﬂy larvae (family Simuliidae). The generally
lower concentrations in the ‘runs’ reﬂect the higherprobability of pellets settling to the river bed in these sections compared to the ‘rapids’ sections. The numbers above the error bars are percentages of the mass of total organic matter in the ﬂowingwater (seston) made up of fecal pellets. (AfterMalmqvist et al. , 2001.)nutrient ﬂux in lakes:
important roles forplankton and lakepositionEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 534••THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 535
••(a)
L8Toolik Lake
L7
L6
L5
L4
L3
L2L10 1 km
Mg (µM)
L4 L210304050
L3
Lake (high to low altitude)(b)
20
Ca (µM)
0300
250200150
100
L1 L5 L6 L7 L8 TLMagnesium
CalciumPrimary production (µmol C m–2 day–1)
L4 L2468
L3
Lake (high to low altitude)(c)
2
L1 L5 L6 L7 L8 TL0Particulate C and N (N*10) (µM)
L4 L210304050
L3
Lake (high to low altitude)(d)
20
Particulate phosphorus (µM)
0.00.3
0.2
0.1
L1 L5 L6 L7 L8 TLN*10
PhosphorusCarbon
Figure 18.10 (a) Spatial arrangement of eight small lakes (L1–L8) interconnected by a river that ﬂows into Toolik Lake (TL) in arctic
Alaska. (b) Mean values, averaged over all sampling occasions during 1991–97 ( ±SE), for magnesium (Mg) and calcium (Ca) concentrations
in the study lakes. (c) Pattern in primary productivity down the lake chain. (d) Mean values for carbon (C), nitrogen (N) and p hosphorus
in particulate form. (After Kling et al. , 2000.)EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 535••536 CHAPTER 18
The main reason for the downstream increase in magnesium and
calcium was increased weathering (Figure 18.10b). This comesabout because a greater proportion of the water entering down-stream lakes has been in intimate contact with the parent rockfor longer; put another way, the higher concentrations reﬂect 
the larger catchment areas that feed the downstream lakes. The pattern for calcium and magnesium may also partly reﬂect progressive evaporative concentration with longer residencetimes of water in the system as well as material processing by the biota in streams and lakes as the water moves downstream.The nutrients that generally limit production in lakes, nitrogenand phosphorus, were in very low concentrations and could not be reliably measured. However, the downstream decrease inproductivity that was observed (Figure 18.10c) suggests that 
the available nutrients were consumed by the plankton in eachlake and this consumption was sufﬁcient to lower the nutrientavailability in successive lakes downstream. The downstreamdecrease of nitrogen, phosphorus and carbon in particulate mat-ter (Figure 18.10d) simply reﬂects the lower downstream rates ofprimary productivity. Note that it is unusual to have a downstreamdecline in productivity. In less pristine conditions, productivity is more likely to increase in a downstream direction (e.g. Kratz et al. , 1997), partly because of the addition of more nutrients from
larger catchment areas but also because of increasing human inputs
in lowland areas through fertilizer application and sewage.
Many lakes in arid regions, lacking
a stream outﬂow, lose water only 
by evaporation. The waters of theseendorheic lakes (internal ﬂow) are thusmore concentrated than their freshwatercounterparts, being particularly rich insodium (with values up to 30,000 mg l
−1
or more) but also in other nutrients such as phosphorus (up 
to 7000 µgl−1or more). Saline lakes should not be considered as
oddities; globally, they are just as abundant in terms of numbersand volume as freshwater lakes (Williams, 1988). They are usu-ally very fertile and have dense populations of blue-green algae(for example, Spirulina platensis ), and some, such as Lake Nakuru
in Kenya, support huge aggregations of plankton-ﬁltering ﬂamin-
goes ( Phoeniconaias minor ). No doubt, the high level of phospho-
rus is due in part to the concentrating effect of evaporation. Inaddition, there may be a tight nutrient cycle in lakes such as Nakuruin which continuous ﬂamingo feeding and the supply of their excreta to the sediment creates circumstances where phosphorus
••Amphipods
Grass shrimp
Mud crabsInsect
larvaeMarsh
invertebratesIsopod
SpionidAmerican
eel
Harpacticoids
Ostracods
OligochaetesWhite perchAlewife
Planktonic copepods Planktonic diatoms DINRiverine
inputs
Vascular plant detritus
Deposited detritusBenthic diatoms, bacteria
N
Remineralization SedimentsRemineralized N
Sedimentation
Fecal pelletsWhite sucker Mummichog Sand shrimp
Figure 18.11 Conceptual model of nitrogen (N) ﬂux through the food web of the upper Parker River estuary, Massachusetts, USA.
Dashed arrows indicate suspected pathways. DIN, dissolved inorganic nitrogen. (After Hughes et al. , 2000.)saline lakes lose
water only byevaporation, andhave high nutrientconcentrationsEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 536••THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 537
is continuously regenerated from the sediment to be taken up again
by phytoplankton (Moss, 1989).
18.3.3 Estuaries
In estuaries, both planktonic organisms(as in lakes) and benthic organisms (asin rivers) are signiﬁcant in nutrientﬂux. Hughes et al. (2000) introduced
tracer levels of a rare isotope of nitro-
gen (as nitrate-containing 
15N) into the
water of an estuary in Massachusetts, USA, to study how nitro-
gen derived from the catchment area is used and transformed in
the estuarine food web. They focused their study on the upper,
low salinity part of the estuary where water derived from the 
river catchment ﬁrst meets the saline inﬂuence of tidal seawater.The planktonic centric diatom Actinocyclus normanii turned out to 
be the primary vector of nitrogen to some benthic organisms (large crustaceans) and particularly pelagic organisms (planktonic copepods and juvenile ﬁshes). Certain components of the sedi-mentary biota received a small proportion of their nitrogen via the centric diatom (10–30%; e.g. pennate diatoms, harpacticoidcopepods, oligochaete worms, bottom-feeding ﬁshes such asmummichog, Fundulus heteroclitus , and sand shrimps). But many
others obtained almost all their nitrogen from a pathway based
on plant detritus. The patterns of nitrogen ﬂow through this estuarine food web are shown in Figure 18.11. The relativeimportance of nutrient ﬂuxes through the grazer and decomposersystems can be expected to vary from estuary to estuary.
The chemistry of estuarine (and
coastal marine) water is strongly inﬂu-enced by features of the catchmentarea through which the rivers have
been ﬂowing, and human activities play a major role in determiningthe nature of the water supplied. In a revealing comparison, vanBreeman (2002) describes the forms of nitrogen in water at themouths of rivers in North and South America. In the North
American case, where the river ﬂows through a largely forestedregion but has been subject to considerable human impact (fertilizer input, logging, acid precipitation, etc.), nitrogen wasalmost exclusively exported to estuaries and the sea in inorganicform (only 2% organic). In contrast, a pristine South Americanriver, subject to very little human impact, exported 70% of its nitrogen in organic form. In Australian rivers too, pristineforested catchments export little nitrogen or phosphorus, and thepredominant form of nitrogen is organic. As human populationdensity increases (greater agricultural runoff and sewage) and forests are cleared (less tight retention of nutrients), however, the export to river mouths of both nitrogen and phosphorusincreases and the predominant form of nitrogen changes to inorganic (Figure 18.12).
••
TN exports (kg ha–1 yr–1)
60 4000203040
20
Population density (ha–1)(a)
102535
15
5DIN export as %TN
100 1000.1305070
1
TN export (kg ha–1 yr–1)(b)
104060
20
Figure 18.12 (a) Export of total nitrogen (TN) in relation to
population density in 24 catchment areas near Sydney, Australia.
(b) Rivers with low TN export rates (more pristine) containnitrogen predominantly in organic form and the percentage of TN that is inorganic increases with TN. DIN, dissolved
inorganic nitrogen. (After Harris, 2001.)nutrient ﬂux in
estuaries: roles for planktonic and benthicorganisms . . .
. . . and humanactivitiesEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 537538 CHAPTER 18
18.3.4 Continental shelf regions of the oceans
The nutrient budgets of coastal regions
of oceans, like estuaries, are stronglyinﬂuenced by the nature of catchmentareas that supply the water, via rivers,to the sea. Concentrations of nitrogen
or phosphorus may limit productivity in these areas as in other
water bodies, but a further human-induced effect on the chemistryof riverwater has special signiﬁcance for planktonic communitiesin the oceans. Today, more than 25% of the world’s rivers havebeen dammed or diverted (for hydroelectric generation, irrigationand human water supply). Associated with damming is the lossof upper soils and vegetation through inundation, loss of soilthrough shoreline erosion, and underground channeling of waterthrough tunnels. These effects reduce the contact of water with
vegetated soil and, therefore, reduce weathering. Figure 18.13 illus-trates the patterns of export of dissolved silicate, an essential component of the cells of planktonic diatoms in the sea, for adammed river and a freely ﬂowing river in Sweden. The exportof silicate was dramatically lower in the dammed case. The pos-sible ecological effects of silicate reduction to nutrient ﬂuxes andproductivity in the sea may become particularly signiﬁcant in EastAsia, where major rivers are being dammed at accelerating rates(Milliman, 1997).
Another important mechanism of
nutrient enrichment in coastal regions islocal upwelling, bringing high nutrientconcentrations from deep to shallow
water where they fuel primary productivity, often producing
phytoplankton blooms. Three categories of upwelling have beendescribed and studied off the east coast of Australia: (i) wind-driven
upwellings in response to seasonal north and northeasterlybreezes; (ii) upwelling driven by the encroachment of the East Australian Current (EAC) onto the continental shelf; and (iii) upwelling caused by the separation of the EAC from the coast.Figure 18.14 provides examples of the distribution of nitrate concentrations associated with each mechanism. Wind-driven
upwellings (generally considered to be the dominant mechanism
globally) are not persistent or massive in scale. The highestnitrate concentrations are generally associated with encroachmentupwellings, whilst separation upwellings are the most widespreadalong the coast of New South Wales.
18.3.5 Open oceans
We can view the open ocean as the largest of all endorheic
‘lakes’ – a huge basin of water supplied by the world’s rivers andlosing water only by evaporation. Its great size, in comparison to the input from rain and rivers, leads to a remarkably constantchemical composition.
We considered biologically medi-
ated transformations of carbon in ter-
restrial ecosystems in Section 18.2.3.Figure 18.15 illustrates the same thingbut for the open ocean. The main transformers of dissolved inorganic carbon (essentially CO
2) are the small phytoplankton,
which recycle CO2 in the euphotic zone, and the larger plankton,
which generate the majority of the carbon ﬂux in particulate and
dissolved organic form to the deep ocean ﬂoor. Figure 18.16 showsthat, in general, only a small proportion of carbon ﬁxed near the
•• ••DSi (µM)
1989200
93
Year(a)
180
160140120
100
80604020
90 9491 9592 96 97 98 99
1989200
93
Year(b)
180160140120
100
80604020
90 9491 9592 96 97 98 99
Figure 18.13 Dissolved silicate (DSi) concentrations at the river mouths of (a) the nondammed River Kalixalven and (b) the dammed
River Lulealven. (Humborg et al. , 2002).
. . . and local
upwellingthe open ocean: animportant role forplankton . . .coastal regions ofoceans are inﬂuencedby their terrestrialcatchment areas . . .EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 538THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 539
surface ﬁnds its way to the ocean bed. What reaches the ocean
ﬂoor is consumed by the deep-sea biota, some is remineralizedinto dissolved organic form by decomposers, and a small proportionbecomes buried in the sediment.
Just as we saw in terrestrial ecosys-
tems, marked seasonal and interannual
differences in nutrient ﬂux and avail-ability can be detected in the deep
ocean. Thus, Figure 18.17a shows how chlorophyll aconcen-
trations varied during the spring bloom at a site in the NorthAtlantic, reﬂecting a succession of dominant phytoplanktonspecies. Large diatoms bloomed ﬁrst, consuming almost all theavailable silicate (Figure 18.17b). Subsequently, a bloom of small ﬂagellates used up the remaining nitrate. Over a longer
timescale, a remarkable shift in the relative abundance of organicnitrogen and phosporus has been witnessed in the North Paciﬁc.The ocean has traditionally been viewed as nitrogen-limited,
but, when nitrogen limitation is extreme, nitrogen-ﬁxing taxa suchas Trichodesmium spp. grow over large areas and bring into play
the inexhaustible pool of dissolved N
2in the ocean. This has 
led to a decade-long shift in the N : P ratio in suspended partic-ulate organic matter (Figure 18.17c). Under these circumstances, phosphorus, iron or some other nutrient will eventually limit productivity.
About 30% of the world’s oceans
have long been known to have low
productivity despite high concentra-tions of nitrate. The hypothesis thatthis paradox was due to the iron lim-itation of phytoplankton productivity has been tested in locationsas different as the eastern equatorial Paciﬁc and the open polarSouthern Ocean (Boyd, 2002). Large infusions of dissolved iron
•• ••Jan 24, 1999(b)   Diamond Head
80
46
Jan 30, 1999(c)   Point Stephens
64
2
88
152.6 152.2 152.42
3Depth (m)
153.6 153.2–200153–150–1000
153.4–50
153.2 152.8 153
Longitude ( °E)1
3
8Depth (m)
–200–150–1000
Nov 15, 1998–502
64
8(a)   Urunga
1
3
2
10
Figure 18.14 Contours of nitrate concentration during upwelling events along the New South Wales coast at: (a) Urunga (wind-driven),
(b) Diamond Head (encroachment-driven), and (c) Point Stephens (separation-driven). The bottom graph in each case shows the mea n
nitrate concentrations that can be taken as characteristic of these sites in the absence of an upwelling event. Maximum concent ration is 
10 µmol l−1. The contour interval is 1 or 2 µmol l−1and the thick orange line represents 8 µmol l−1. (After Roughan & Middleton, 2002.)
. . . which may follow
a seasonal pattern
iron as a factorlimiting oceanprimary productivity?EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 539•• ••540 CHAPTER 18
at sites in each ocean led in both cases to dramatic increases in
primary productivity and decreases in nitrate and silicate, asthese were taken up during algal production (the results areexpressed as nitrate removal in Figure 18.18). Bacterial pro-ductivity tripled within a few days in both cases, and rates of 
herbivory by micrograzers (ﬂagellates and ciliates) also increased,but less so in the polar situation (where dominance by a grazer-resistant, highly siliciﬁed diatom probably suppressed grazing). The metazoan community, dominated by copepods, showed relatively little change in either situation.
It is an intriguing thought that in places such as the eastern
equatorial Paciﬁc or polar Southern Ocean, blooms in productivitymight sometimes be caused by long-distance wind transport ofland-derived, iron-rich particles. This would mirror, but on a very
different scale, the high productivity associated with inputs of land-derived, nutrient-rich water from rivers.Air–sea exchangeAtmosphere
Ocean surface
Mixed layer
BenthosDissolved inorganics
Small phytoplankton Large phytoplankton
Bacteria Macrozooplankton Microzooplankton
Bacteria
Dissolved inorganicsDissolved organics Particulate organicsParticulate organics Dissolved organicsDeep ocean
Figure 18.15 Biologically mediated
transformations of carbon in the open
ocean. (After Fasham et al. , 2001.)
Primary production (mmol C m–2 day–1)POC flux (mmol C m–2 day–1)
0010203040506070
20 40 60 80 100 120 140Equatorial Pacific
Sargasso SeaArabian Sea: Jan–JulArabian Sea: Aug–SeptPolar regionsNorth Atlantic
10%
2%50%
Figure 18.16 Relationship between the export of particulate
organic carbon (POC) to the ocean depths, recorded at 100 m, 
and ocean primary productivity in the world’s oceans. (After Buesseler, 1998.)EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 540•• ••THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 541
(a)Chlorophyll a (mg m–3)
0
11023
14
120 130 140 150 160
(b)Nutrient concentration (mmol m–3)
0
11023
18
120 130 140 150 1604567Nitrate
Silicate
Day number
(c)N : P ratio (mol : mol)
02030
1040
1989Jan July Jan July Jan July Jan July Jan July Jan July Jan July Jan July Jan July Jan July
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998Figure 18.17 Patterns in (a) chlorophyll a
and (b) silicate and nitrate concentrations
during a spring bloom in the NorthAtlantic. Day number is days since January1. (After Fasham et al. , 2001.) (c) Shift in
the ratio of N : P in suspended particulate
matter measured in the North Paciﬁc Gyre.(After Karl, 1999.)EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 541•• ••542 CHAPTER 18
surface of the globe, and precipitation brings it down to earth (with
a net movement of atmospheric water from oceans to continents),where it may be stored temporarily in soils, lakes and iceﬁelds.Loss occurs from the land through evaporation and transpirationor as liquid ﬂow through stream channels and groundwater
aquifers, eventually to return to the sea. The major pools of wateroccur in the oceans (97.3% of the total for the biosphere; Berner& Berner, 1987), the ice of polar ice caps and glaciers (2.06%),deep in the groundwater (0.67%) and in rivers and lakes (0.01%).The proportion that is in transit at any time is very small – waterdraining through the soil, ﬂowing along rivers and present as cloudsand vapor in the atmosphere constitutes only about 0.08% of thetotal. However, this small percentage plays a crucial role, bothby supplying the requirements for survival of living organisms and
for community productivity, and because so many chemicalnutrients are transported with the water as it moves.(a)NPP (mg C m–2 day–1)
003000
Time (days)2468 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 82500
200015001000
500(b)Nitrate removal (mmol m–3)
0.00
Time (days)2468 1 0 1 2 1 40.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
Figure 18.18 (a) Rates of depth-integrated net primary production (NPP) after iron addition at sites in the eastern equatorial Paciﬁc
Ocean ( 4) and polar Southern Ocean ( /H17033). (b) Nitrate removal during the time course of the two experiments. Note that silicate followed
similar patterns. (After Boyd, 2002.)
Vapor transport 0.037Atmosphere  (0.013)
Precipitation
0.110
Precipitation
0.386Evaporation
0.423
Ocean  (1370)Evaporation
0.073
Ice (29)
Runoff 0.037Rivers and lakes
(0.13)
Groundwater
(9.5)Figure 18.19 The hydrological cycle
showing ﬂuxes and sizes of reservoirs 
(×106km3). Values in parentheses 
represent the size of the various reservoirs.(After Berner & Berner, 1987.)18.4 Global biogeochemical cycles
Nutrients are moved over vast distances by winds in the atmo-
sphere and by the moving waters of streams and ocean cur-rents. There are no boundaries, either natural or political. It isappropriate, therefore, to conclude this chapter by moving to an even larger spatial scale to examine global biogeochemical 
cycles.
18.4.1 Hydrological cycle
The hydrological cycle is simple to conceive (although its elements
are by no means always easy to measure) (Figure 18.19). The principal source of water is the oceans; radiant energy makes water evaporate into the atmosphere, winds distribute it over theEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 542••THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 543
The hydrological cycle would pro-
ceed whether or not a biota was pre-
sent. However, terrestrial vegetationcan modify to a signiﬁcant extent the
ﬂuxes that occur. Plants live between two counterﬂowing move-
ments of water (McCune & Boyce, 1992). One moves within theplant, proceeding from the soil into the roots, up through the stemand out from the leaves as transpiration. The other is depositedon the canopy as precipitation from where it may evaporate ordrip from the leaves or ﬂow down the stem to the soil. In theabsence of vegetation, some of the incoming water would evaporate from the ground surface but the rest would enter thestream ﬂow (via surface runoff and groundwater discharge).Vegetation can intercept water at two points on this journey, pre-
venting some from reaching the stream and causing it to moveback into the atmosphere by: (i) catching some in foliage fromwhere it may evaporate; and (ii) preventing some from drainingfrom the soil water by taking it up in the transpiration stream.
We have seen on a small scale how cutting down the forest
in a catchment in Hubbard Brook can increase the throughputto streams of water together with its load of dissolved and par-ticulate matter. It is small wonder that large-scale deforestationaround the globe, usually to create new agricultural land, can leadto the loss of topsoil, nutrient impoverishment and increased sever-ity of ﬂooding.
Another major perturbation to the hydrological cycle will 
be global climate change resulting from human activities (see
Section 18.4.6). The predicted temperature increase, with itsconcomitant changes to wind and weather patterns, can beexpected to affect the hydrological cycle by causing some melting
of polar caps and glaciers, by changing patterns of precipitationand by inﬂuencing the details of evaporation, transpiration andstream ﬂow.
18.4.2 A general model of global nutrient ﬂux
The world’s major abiotic reservoirs fornutrients are illustrated in Figure 18.20.The biotas of both terrestrial and aquatichabitats obtain some of their nutrientelements predominantly via the wea-
thering of rock. This is the case, for example, for phosphorus.Carbon and nitrogen, on the other hand, derive mainly from theatmosphere – the ﬁrst from CO
2and the second from gaseous
nitrogen, ﬁxed by microorganisms in the soil and water. Sulfur
derives from both atmospheric and lithospheric sources. In thefollowing sections we consider phosphorus, nitrogen, sulfur andcarbon in turn, and ask how human activities upset the global
biogeochemical cycles of these biologically important elements.
18.4.3 Phosphorus cycle
The principal stocks of phosphorus
occur in the water of the soil, rivers,lakes and oceans and in rocks andocean sediments. The phosphorus
••Atmosphere
Terestrial
communitiesLand
clearance,forestry,
agriculture
Rock
Geological uplift
creating new landInternal
cycling
Biotic
uptakeRunoffPrecipitationgaseous and aerosoluptake
Water
inrivers, lakesand oceansin
soil
WeatheringIncreased
concentrations inwater
Respiration, gaseousand aerosolemission
Stream flow Biotic
uptake
SedimentationHarvesting
Ocean
sedimentsIncreased emissionto atmosphere
Humanactivities
Aquaticcommunities Internal
cyclingFigure 18.20 The major global pathways
of nutrients between the abiotic ‘reservoirs’
of atmosphere, water (hydrosphere) androck and sediments (lithosphere), and thebiotic ‘reservoirs’ constituted by terrestrial
and aquatic communities. Human activities(in color) affect nutrient ﬂuxes through theterrestrial and aquatic communities bothdirectly and indirectly, via their effects onglobal biogeochemical cycling through therelease of extra nutrients into theatmosphere and water.plants live between
two counterﬂowingmovements of water
major nutrientcompartments andﬂuxes in global biogeochemical cycles
phosphorus derivesmainly from theweathering of rocksEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 543544 CHAPTER 18
cycle may be described as an ‘open’ cycle because of the general
tendency for mineral phosphorus to be carried from the land inex-orably to the oceans, mainly in rivers, but also to smaller extentsin groundwater, or via volcanic activity and atmospheric fallout,or through abrasion of coastal land. The cycle may alternatively
be termed a ‘sedimentary cycle’ because ultimately phosphorusbecomes incorporated in ocean sediments (Figure 18.21a). We canunravel an intriguing story that starts in a terrestrial catchmentarea. A typical phosphorus atom, released from the rock bychemical weathering, may enter and cycle within the terrestrial
community for years, decades or centuries before it is carried viagroundwater into a stream, where it takes part in the nutrientspiraling described in Section 18.3.1. Within a short time ofentering the stream (weeks, months or years), the atom is car-
ried to the ocean. It then makes, on average, about 100 roundtrips between the surface and deep waters, each lasting perhaps1000 years. During each trip, it is taken up by organisms that liveat the ocean surface, before eventually settling into the deep again.
•• ••Figure 18.21 The main pathways of nutrient ﬂux (black) and the perturbations caused by human activities (color) for four important
nutrient elements: (a) phosphorus, (b) nitrogen, (c) sulfur (DMS, dimethylsuﬁde), and (d) carbon. Insigniﬁcant compartments and  ﬂuxes 
are represented by dashed lines. (Based on the model illustrated in Figure 18.10, where further details can be found.)EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 544THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 545
On average, on its 100th descent (after 10 million years in the ocean)
it fails to be released as soluble phosphorus, but instead entersthe bottom sediment in particulate form. Perhaps 100 million years later, the ocean ﬂoor is lifted up by geological activity tobecome dry land. Thus, our phosphorus atom will eventually ﬁnd
its way back via a river to the sea, and to its existence of cycle(biotic uptake and decomposition) within cycle (ocean mixing)within cycle (continental uplift and erosion).
Human activities affect the phos-
phorus cycle in a number of ways.Marine ﬁshing transfers about 50 Tg (1 teragram =10
12g) of phosphorus
from the ocean to the land each year.
Since the total oceanic pool of phos-phorus is around 120 Pg (1 petagram =
10
15g), this reverse ﬂow has negligible consequences for the ocean 
compartment. However, phosphorus from the ﬁsh catch willeventually move back through the rivers to the sea and, thus, ﬁshingcontributes indirectly to increased concentrations in inlandwaters. More than 13 Tg of phosphorus are dispersed annually
over agricultural land as fertilizer (some derived from the marineﬁsh catch) and a further 2 or 3 Tg as an additive to domestic deter-gents. Much of the former reaches the aquatic system as agriculturalrunoff, whereas the latter arrives in domestic sewage. In addition,deforestation and many forms of land cultivation increase erosionin catchment areas and contribute to artiﬁcially high amounts of phosphorus in runoff water. All told, human activities havealmost doubled the inﬂow of phosphorus to the oceans above thatwhich occurs naturally (Savenko, 2001).
An increase to phosphorus input 
to the oceans on this scale is likely to
have increased productivity to someextent, but as the more concentrated
water passes through rivers, estuaries, coastal waters and particu-larly lakes, its inﬂuence can be particularly profound. This is because phosphorus is often the nutrient whose supply limitsaquatic plant growth. In many lakes worldwide, the input of largequantities of phosphorus from agricultural runoff and sewage andalso of nitrogen (mainly as runoff from agricultural land) producesideal conditions for high phytoplankton productivity. In suchcases of cultural eutrophication (enrichment), the lake waterbecomes turbid because of dense populations of phytoplankton
(often the blue-green species), and large aquatic plants are out-competed and disappear along with their associated invertebratepopulations. Moreover, decomposition of the large biomass of phytoplankton cells may lead to low oxygen concentrations,which kill ﬁsh and invertebrates. The outcome is a productive com-munity, but one with low biodiversity and low esthetic appeal.The remedy is to reduce nutrient input; for example, by altering agricultural practices and by diverting sewage, or by chemically‘stripping’ phosphorus from treated sewage before it is dis-charged. Where phosphate loading has been reduced in deep lakes,such as Lake Washington in North America, a reversal of the trends
described above may occur within a few years (Edmonson, 1970).In shallow lakes, however, phosphorus stored in the sediment may
continue to be released and the physical removal of some of thesediment may be called for (Moss et al. , 1988).
The effects of agricultural runoff and sewage discharge are 
localized, in the sense that only those waters that drain thecatchment area concerned are affected. But the problem is pervasive and worldwide.
18.4.4 Nitrogen cycle
The atmospheric phase is predominant
in the global nitrogen cycle, in whichnitrogen ﬁxation and denitriﬁcation bymicrobial organisms are by far the mostimportant (Figure 18.21b). Atmospheric
nitrogen is also ﬁxed by lightning discharges during storms andreaches the ground as nitric acid dissolved in rainwater, but onlyabout 3–4% of ﬁxed nitrogen derives from this pathway. Organicforms of nitrogen are also widespread in the atmosphere, someof which results from the reaction of hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen in polluted air masses. In addition, amines and ureaare naturally injected as aerosols or gases from terrestrial and aquaticecosystems; and a third source consists of bacteria and pollen (Neffet al. , 2002). While the atmospheric phase produces by far the most
important input of nitrogen, there is also evidence that nitrogen
from certain geological sources may fuel local productivity in terrestrial and freshwater communities (Holloway et al. , 1998;
Thompson et al. , 2001). The magnitude of the nitrogen ﬂux in
stream ﬂow from terrestrial to aquatic communities may be relat-ively small, but it is by no means insigniﬁcant for the aquatic sys-tems involved. This is because nitrogen is one of the two elements(along with phosphorus) that most often limits plant growth.Finally, there is a small annual loss of nitrogen to ocean sediments.
In a model for the terrestrial part of the biosphere, nitrogen
ﬁxation accounts for the input of 211 Tg N year
−1. This is the 
predominant annual source of nitrogen and can be compared 
with the total amount stored in terrestrial vegetation and soil of 296 Pg year
−1(280 Pg year−1of which is in the soil, and 90% of
this in organic form) (Lin et al. , 2000).
Human activities have a variety 
of far-reaching effects on the nitrogencycle. Deforestation, and land clearance
in general, leads to substantial increasesin nitrate ﬂux in the stream ﬂow and N
2O losses to the atmosphere
(see Section 18.2.2). In addition, technological processes yield 
ﬁxed nitrogen as a by-product of internal combustion and in theproduction of fertilizers. The agricultural practice of plantinglegume crops, with their root nodules containing nitrogen-ﬁxing
bacteria, contributes further to nitrogen ﬁxation. In fact, the
•• ••the nitrogen cycle has
an atmospheric phase of overwhelmingimportancehuman activitiescontribute themajority ofphosphorus in inland waters . . .
. . . and causeeutrophication
humans impact onthe nitrogen cycle indiverse waysEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 545546 CHAPTER 18
amount of ﬁxed nitrogen produced by these human activities is
of the same order of magnitude as that produced by natural nitrogen ﬁxation. The production of nitrogenous fertilizers (morethan 50 Tg year
−1) is of particular signiﬁcance because an appre-
ciable proportion of fertilizer added to land ﬁnds its way into streamsand lakes. The artiﬁcially raised concentrations of nitrogen con-tribute to the process of cultural eutrophication of lakes.
Human activities impinge on the atmospheric phase of the 
nitrogen cycle too. For example, fertilization of agricultural soils
leads to increased runoff as well as an increase in denitriﬁcation,and the handling and spreading of manure in areas of intensiveanimal husbandry releases substantial amounts of ammonia to the atmosphere. Atmospheric ammonia (NH
3) is increasingly
recognized as a major pollutant when it is deposited downwind
of livestock farming areas (Sutton et al. , 1993). Since many plant
communities are adapted to low nutrient conditions, anincreased input of nitrogen can be expected to cause changes to
community composition. Lowland heathland is particularly sensitive to nitrogen enrichment (this is a terrestrial counterpartto lake eutrophication) and, for example, more than 35% of former Dutch heathland has now been replaced by grassland(Bobbink et al. , 1992). Further sensitive communities include cal-
careous grasslands and upland herb and bryophyte ﬂoras, wheredeclines in species richness have been recorded (Sutton et al., 1993).
The vegetation of some other terrestrial communities may be lesssensitive, because it may reach a stage where nitrogen is not 
limited. Increased nitrogen deposition to forests, for example, canbe expected to result initially in increased forest growth, but atsome point the system becomes ‘nitrogen-saturated’ (Aber, 1992).Further increases in nitrogen deposition can be expected to ‘breakthrough’ into drainage, with raised concentrations of nitrogen instream runoff contributing to eutrophication of downstream lakes.
There is clear evidence of increased
NH
3 emissions during the past few
decades and current estimates indicate
that these account for 60–80% of
anthropogenic nitrogen input to European ecosystems, at leastin localized areas around livestock operations (Sutton et al. ,
1993). The other 20–40% derives from oxides of nitrogen (NO
x),
resulting from combustion of oil and coal in power stations, and from industrial processes and trafﬁc emissions. AtmosphericNO
xis converted, within days, to nitric acid, which contributes,
together with NH3, to the acidity of precipitation within and down-
wind of industrial regions. Sulfuric acid is the other culprit, andwe outline the consequences of acid rain in the next section, afterdealing with the global sulfur cycle.
18.4.5 Sulfur cycle
In the global phosphorus cycle we have seen that the lithosphericphase is predominant (Figure 18.21a), whereas the nitrogen cyclehas an atmospheric phase of overwhelming importance (Fig-
ure 18.21b). Sulfur, by contrast, has atmospheric and lithosphericphases of similar magnitude (Figure 18.21c).
Three natural biogeochemical 
processes release sulfur to the atmo-sphere: (i) the formation of the volatile
compound dimethylsulﬁde (DMS) (by enzymatic breakdown of an abund-ant compound in phytoplankton –dimethylsulfonioproprionate); (ii) anaerobic respiration by sulfate-reducing bacteria; and (iii) volcanic activity. Total biological release of sulfur to the atmosphere is estimated to be22 Tg S year
−1, and of this more than 90% is in the form of DMS.
Most of the remainder is produced by sulfur bacteria that release
reduced sulfur compounds, particularly H2S, from waterlogged
bog and marsh communities and from marine communitiesassociated with tidal ﬂats. Volcanic production provides a further7 Tg S year
−1to the atmosphere (Simo, 2001). A reverse ﬂow
from the atmosphere involves oxidation of sulfur compounds to sulfate, which returns to earth as both wetfall and dryfall.
The weathering of rocks provides about half the sulfur drain-
ing off the land into rivers and lakes, the remainder deriving from
atmospheric sources. On its way to the ocean, a proportion ofthe available sulfur (mainly dissolved sulfate) is taken up by plants,passed along food chains and, via decomposition processes,becomes available again to plants. However, in comparison to phosphorus and nitrogen, a much smaller fraction of the ﬂux ofsulfur is involved in internal recycling in terrestrial and aquaticcommunities. Finally, there is a continuous loss of sulfur toocean sediments, mainly through abiotic processes such as the conversion of H
2S, by reaction with iron, to ferrous sulﬁde
(which gives marine sediments their black color).
The combustion of fossil fuels is
the major human perturbation to the
global sulfur cycle (coal contains 1–5%
sulfur and oil contains 2–3%). The SO2released to the atmosphere
is oxidized and converted to sulfuric acid in aerosol droplets, mostly
less than 1 µm in size. Natural and human releases of sulfur to
the atmosphere are of similar magnitude and together accountfor 70 Tg S year
−1 (Simo, 2001). Whereas natural inputs are spread
fairly evenly over the globe, most human inputs are concentratedin and around industrial zones in northern Europe and easternNorth America, where they can contribute up to 90% of the total (Fry & Cooke, 1984). Concentrations decline progressively
downwind from sites of production, but they can still be high atdistances of several hundred kilometers. Thus, one nation canexport its SO
2to other countries; concerted international political
action is required to alleviate the problems that arise.
Water in equilibrium with CO2in the atmosphere forms
dilute carbonic acid with a pH of about 5.6. However, the pH 
of acid precipitation (rain or snow) can average well below 5.0,and values as low as 2.4 have been recorded in Britain, 2.8 in
•• ••nitrogen and 
acid rainsulfur and acid rainthe sulfur cycle hasatmospheric andlithospheric phases ofsimilar magnitudeEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 546THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 547
Scandinavia and 2.1 in the USA. The emission of SO2often con-
tributes most to the acid rain problem, though together NOxand
NH3account for 30–50% of the problem (Mooney et al. , 1987;
Sutton et al. , 1993).
We saw earlier how a low pH can drastically affect the 
biotas of streams and lakes (see Chapter 2). Acid rain (see 
Section 2.8) has been responsible for the extinction of ﬁsh in 
thousands of lakes, particularly in Scandinavia. In addition, a lowpH can have far-reaching consequences for forests and other terrestrial communities. It can affect plants directly, by breakingdown lipids in foliage and damaging membranes, or indirectly,by increasing leaching of some nutrients from the soil and by rendering other nutrients unavailable for uptake by plants. It isimportant to note that some perturbations to biogeochemical cyclesarise through indirect, ‘knock-on’ effects on other biogeochemicalcomponents. For example, alterations in the sulfur ﬂux in them-
selves are not always damaging to terrestrial and aquatic com-munities, but the effect of sulfate’s ability to mobilize metals such as aluminum, to which many organisms are sensitive, may indirectly lead to changes in community composition. (Inanother context, sulfate in lakes can reduce the ability of iron to bind phosphorus, releasing the phosphorus and increasingphytoplankton productivity (Caraco, 1993).)
Provided that governments show the political will to reduce
emissions of SO
2and NOx(for example, by making use of tech-
niques already available to remove sulfur from coal and oil), 
the acid rain problem should be controllable. Indeed reductionsin sulfur emissions have occurred in various parts of the world.
18.4.6 Carbon cycle
Photosynthesis and respiration are thetwo opposing processes that drive theglobal carbon cycle. It is predominantlya gaseous cycle, with CO
2as the main
vehicle of ﬂux between the atmosphere,
hydrosphere and biota. Historically, the lithosphere played onlya minor role; fossil fuels lay as dormant reservoirs of carbon untilhuman intervention in recent centuries (Figure 18.21d).
Terrestrial plants use atmospheric CO
2as their carbon source
for photosynthesis, whereas aquatic plants use dissolved carbon-ates (i.e. carbon from the hydrosphere). The two subcycles arelinked by exchanges of CO
2between the atmosphere and oceans
as follows:
atmospheric CO20dissolved CO2
CO2+H2O 0H2CO3(carbonic acid).
In addition, carbon ﬁnds its way into inland waters and oceansas bicarbonate resulting from weathering (carbonation) of calcium-
rich rocks such as limestone and chalk:CO
2+H2O+CaCO30CaH2(CO3)2.
Respiration by plants, animals and microorganisms releases 
the carbon locked in photosynthetic products back to the atmospheric and hydrospheric carbon compartments.
The concentration of CO
2in the
atmosphere has increased from about
280 parts per million (ppm) in 1750 tomore than 370 ppm today and it is stillrising. The pattern of increase recorded
at the Mauna Loa Observatory inHawaii since 1958 is shown in Figure 18.22. (Note the cyclicaldecreases in CO
2associated with higher rates of photosynthesis
during summer in the northern hemisphere – reﬂecting the fact
that most of the world’s landmass is north of the equator.)
We discussed this increase in 
atmospheric CO2, and the associated
exaggeration in the greenhouse effect,
in Sections 2.9.1 and 2.9.2, but armedwith a more comprehensive appreciation of carbon budgets, wecan now revisit this subject. The principal causes of the increase
has been the combustion of fossil fuels and, to a much smallerextent, the kilning of limestone to produce cement (the latter produces less than 2% of that produced by fossil fuel burning).Together, during the period 1980–95, these accounted for a net increase in the atmosphere averaging 5.7 ( ± 0.5) Pg C year
−1
(Houghton, 2000).
Land-use change has caused a further
1.9 (± 0.2) Pg of carbon to enter the
atmosphere each year. The exploitation
of tropical forest causes a signiﬁcant
release of CO2, but the precise effect depends on whether forest
is cleared for permanent agriculture, shifting agriculture or tim-
ber production. The burning that follows most forest clearancequickly converts some of the vegetation to CO
2, while decay 
of the remaining vegetation releases CO2 over a more extended
period. If forests have been cleared to provide for permanent agriculture, the carbon content of the soil is reduced by decom-position of the organic matter, by erosion and sometimes bymechanical removal of the topsoil. Clearance for shifting agriculture
has similar effects, but the regeneration of ground ﬂora and secondary forest during the fallow period sequesters a proportionof the carbon originally lost. Shifting agriculture and timberextraction involve ‘temporary’ clearance in which the net releaseof CO
2per unit area is signiﬁcantly less than is the case for 
‘permanent’ clearance for agriculture
or pasture. Changes to land use in non-tropical terrestrial communities seem tohave had a negligible effect on the net
release of CO
2to the atmosphere.
The total amount of carbon
released each year to the atmosphere 
•• ••. . . the combustion
of fossil fuels . . .
. . . and exploitationof tropical forest
opposing forces ofphotosynthesis andrespiration drive theglobal carbon cycleCO2in the
atmosphere has increased signiﬁcantlybecause of . . .
some of the extra CO
2dissolves in the
oceans ...o r  i s  taken
up by terrestrialplantsEIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 547548 CHAPTER 18
by human activities (7.6 Pg C year−1; see Section 2.9.1) can be com-
pared with the 100–120 Pg C year−1 released naturally by respira-
tion of the world’s biota (Houghton, 2000). Where does 
the extra CO2go? The observed increase in atmospheric CO2
accounts for 3.2 ( ± 1.0) Pg C year−1(i.e. 42% of the human inputs).
Much of the rest, 2.1 ( ± 0.6) Pg C year−1, dissolves in the oceans.
This leaves 2.3 Pg C year−1, which is generally put down to a 
residual terrestrial sink, the magnitude, location and causes of which are uncertain, but are believed to involve increased ter-restrial productivity in northern mid-latitude regions (i.e. part ofthe increase in CO
2may serve to ‘fertilize’ terrestrial communities
and be assimilated into extra biomass) and the recovery of forestsfrom earlier disturbances (Houghton, 2000).
There is considerable year-to-year
variation in the estimates of CO
2
sources and sinks, and of the increasein the atmosphere (Figure 18.23).Indeed, this variation is what allowedstandard errors to be placed on average
values in the previous paragraphs. The declines in atmospheric
increase in CO
2between 1981 and 1982 followed dramatic rises
in oil prices, while the declines in 1992 and 1993 followed the 
economic collapse of the Soviet Union. In 1997–98 (not shownin Figure 18.23), a remarkable wildﬁre in a small part of the globedoubled the growth rate of CO
2in the atmosphere. Massive 
forest ﬁres in Indonesia produced a carbon emission of about 1 Pg in just a few weeks. The burned areas included vast depositsof peat, which lost 25–85 cm of their depth during the ﬁre, andmost of the released carbon came from this source rather than
the burning of wood. The ﬁres in Indonesia were particularly serious due to a combination of circumstances – drought causedby the 1997–98 El Niño event, the thickness of peat present, and
particular logging practices that allowed the vegetation and soilto dry out (Schimel & Baker, 2002). The accurate prediction offuture changes in carbon emissions is a pressing matter, but it willbe a difﬁcult task because so many variables – climatic, politicaland sociological – impinge on the carbon balance. We return tothe many dimensions of the ecological challenges facing mankindat the very end of the book (see Section 22.5.3).
Summary
Living organisms expend energy to extract chemicals from their
environment, hold on to them and use them for a period, andthen lose them again. In this chapter, we consider the ways inwhich the biota on an area of land, or within a volume of water,accumulates, transforms and moves matter between the various
living and abiotic components of the ecosystem. Some abiotic compartments occur in the atmosphere (carbon in carbon dioxide,
nitrogen as gaseous nitrogen), some in the rocks of the lithosphere
(calcium, potassium) and others in the hydrosphere – the water 
of soils, streams, lakes or oceans (nitrogen in dissolved nitrate,phosphorus in phosphate).
Nutrient elements are available to plants as simple inorganic
molecules or ions and can be incorporated into complex organiccarbon compounds in biomass. Ultimately, however, when the
carbon compounds are metabolized to carbon dioxide, the mineralnutrients are released again in simple inorganic form. Another plantmay then absorb them, and so an individual atom of a nutrientelement may pass repeatedly through one food chain afteranother. By its very nature, each joule of energy in a high-energy
•• ••accurate prediction
of future changes incarbon emissions is apressing matter
CO2 (ppm)380
310
Year370
360
350
320330340
1955 1965 1975 1985 1995 2005Figure 18.22 Concentration of
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) at the
Mauna Loa Observatory, Hawaii, showing
the seasonal cycle (resulting from changesin photosynthetic rate) and the long-termincrease that is due largely to the burning
of fossil fuels. (Courtesy of the ClimateMonitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory of the National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration.)EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 548THE FLUX OF MATTER THROUGH ECOSYSTEMS 549
compound can be used only once, whereas chemical nutrients can
be used again, and repeatedly recycled (although nutrient cyclingis never perfect).
We discuss the ways that nutrients are gained and lost in ecosys-
tems and note that inputs and outputs of a given nutrient may
be in balance. However, this is by no means always so, in whichcase the ecosystem is a net source or sink for the nutrient in question. We discuss the components of nutrient budgets, andthe factors affecting inputs and outputs, in forests, streams, lakes,estuaries and oceans.
Because nutrients are moved over vast distances by winds in
the atmosphere and by the moving waters of streams and oceancurrents, we conclude the chapter by examining global biogeo-chemical cycles. The principal source of water in the hydrological
cycle is the oceans; radiant energy makes water evaporate intothe atmosphere, winds distribute it over the surface of the globe,
and precipitation brings it down to earth. Phosphorus derivesmainly from the weathering of rocks (lithosphere); its cycle maybe described as sedimentary because of the general tendency for mineral phosphorus to be carried from the land inexorably 
to the oceans where ultimately it becomes incorporated in sedi-ments. The sulfur cycle has an atmospheric phase and a lithosphericphase of similar magnitude. In contrast, the atmospheric phaseis predominant in both the carbon and nitrogen cycles. Photo-synthesis and respiration are the two opposing processes that drive the global carbon cycle while nitrogen ﬁxation and denitri-ﬁcation by microbial organisms are of particular importance in the nitrogen cycle. Human activities contribute signiﬁcantinputs of nutrients to ecosystems and disrupt local and global 
biogeochemical cycles.
•• ••
Annual flux of carbon (Pg)
–10.01980
Year1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995–8.0–6.0–4.0–2.00.02.04.06.08.010.0
Land use
Fossil fuelsResidual terrestrial sinkOceanic uptakeAtmospheric increaseFigure 18.23 Annual variations in the
atmospheric increase in carbon dioxide
(circles and black line) and in carbonreleased (histograms above the midline) or accumulated (histograms below the
midline) in the global carbon cycle from1980 to 1995. (After Houghton, 2000.)EIPC18  10/24/05  2:13 PM  Page 549••19.1 Introduction
Individual species can inﬂuence the
composition of whole communities ina variety of ways. Every species providesresources for others that prey upon or parasitize them, but some species
(trees, for example) provide a wide
range of resources that are used by a large number of consumerspecies (discussed in Chapter 3). Thus, oak trees can be very inﬂuential in determining the composition and diversity of thecommunities of which they are part by providing acorns, leaves,stemwood and roots for their specialist herbivores as well as asimilar range of dead organic materials that are exploited bydetritivores and decomposers (see Chapter 11). Species may also help determine community composition and diversity by
inﬂuencing conditions (see Chapter 2). Thus, large plants createmicrohabitats that encompass the niche requirements of manysmaller plants and animals, whilst large animals provide a rangeof conditions on and in their bodies that are exploited by a vari-ety of parasites (see Chapter 12). During succession we have alsoseen that some early colonizers facilitate the entry of laterspecies by changing conditions in a way that favors the latter (seeChapter 16). We will not dwell further on these processes.
The current chapter pays particular attention to the way that
competition, predation and parasitism can shape communities. Theideas we present reﬂect a debate that has been central to ecologyfor the last four decades. As we explain below, there are soundtheoretical reasons for expecting interspeciﬁc competition to be
important in shaping communities by determining which, and howmany, species can coexist. Indeed, the prevalent view amongstecologists in the 1970s was that competition was of overridingimportance (MacArthur, 1972; Cody, 1975). Subsequently, the con-ventional wisdom has moved away from this monolithic view toone giving more prominence to nonequilibrial and stochasticfactors, such as physical disturbance and inconstancy in conditions
(see Chapter 16), and to an important role for predation and para-sitism (e.g. Diamond & Case, 1986; Gee & Giller, 1987; Hudson& Greenman, 1998). We ﬁrst consider the role of interspeciﬁc competition in theory and practice before proceeding to theother population interactions that in some communities and forsome organisms make competition much less inﬂuential.
19.2 Inﬂuence of competition on 
community structure
The view that interspeciﬁc competition plays a central and powerful role in the shaping of communities was ﬁrst fosteredby the competitive exclusion principle (see Chapter 8) which saysthat if two or more species compete for the same limitingresource, then all but one of them will be driven to extinction.
More sophisticated variants of the principle, namely the conceptsof limiting similarity, optimum similarity and niche packing (seeChapter 8), have suggested a limit to the similarity of competingspecies, and thus, a limit to the number of species that can beﬁtted into a particular community before niche space is fully saturated. Within this theoretical framework, interspeciﬁc com-petition is obviously important, because it excludes particular speciesfrom some communities, and determines precisely which speciescoexist in others. The crucial question, however, is: ‘how import-
ant are such theoretical effects in the real world?’
19.2.1 Prevalence of current competition in
communities
There is no argument about whether
competition sometimes affects commu-
nity structure; nobody doubts that itinterspeciﬁc
competition maydetermine which,and how many,species can coexist
competition is notalways of overridingimportance
Chapter 19
The Influence of Population
Interactions on CommunityStructure
EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 550THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 551
does. Equally, nobody claims that competition is of overriding
importance in each and every case. In a community where thespecies are competing with one another on a day-to-day orminute-by-minute basis, and where the environment is homo-geneous, it is indisputable that competition will have a powerful
effect on community structure. Suppose instead, though, that otherfactors prevent competition from progressing to competitiveexclusion, by depressing densities or periodically reversing com-petitive superiority. In this context, Hutchinson (1961) notedhow phytoplankton communities generally exhibit high diversitydespite limited opportunities for resource partitioning (his ‘para-dox of the plankton’) and suggested that short-term ﬂuctuationsin conditions (e.g. temperature) or resources (light or nutrients)might prevent competitive exclusion and permit high diversity.
Floder et al. (2002) tested this hypothesis by comparing species
diversity of inocula of natural phytoplankton communities in microcosms maintained at high (100 µmol photons m
−2s−1) or low 
(20µmol photons m−2s−1) light levels with diversities achieved when
light levels were periodically switched from high to low and back
again every 1, 3, 6 or 12 days in a 49-day experiment. As predictedby Hutchinson, diversities were higher under ﬂuctuating condi-tions, where interspeciﬁc competition was less likely to proceed
to competitive exclusion (Figure 19.1).
Perhaps the most direct way of
determining the importance of com-petition in practice is from the resultsof experimental ﬁeld manipulations, inwhich one species is removed from or 
added to the community, and the responses of the other speciesare monitored. Two important surveys of ﬁeld experiments on interspeciﬁc competition were published in 1983. Schoener
(1983) examined the results of all the experiments he could ﬁnd– 164 studies in all – and noted that approximately equal num-bers of studies had dealt with terrestrial plants, terrestrial animalsand marine organisms, but that studies of freshwater organisms
amounted to only about half the number in the other groups.Amongst the terrestrial studies, however, most were concernedwith temperate regions and mainland populations and relativelyfew dealt with phytophagous (plant-eating) insects. Any con-clusions were therefore bound to be subject to the limitationsimposed by what ecologists had chosen to look at. Nevertheless,Schoener found that approximately 90% of the studies haddemonstrated the existence of interspeciﬁc competition, and thatthe ﬁgures were 89, 91 and 94% for terrestrial, freshwater and
marine organisms, respectively. Moreover, if he looked at singlespecies or small groups of species (of which there were 390) ratherthan at whole studies which may have dealt with several groupsof species, 76% showed effects of competition at least sometimes,and 57% showed effects in all the conditions under which theywere examined. Once again, terrestrial, freshwater and marineorganisms gave very similar ﬁgures. Connell’s (1983) review wasless extensive than Schoener’s: 72 studies in six major journals,
dealing with a total of 215 species and 527 different experiments.Interspeciﬁc competition was demonstrated in most of the stud-ies, in more than half of the species, and in approximately 40%of the experiments. In contrast to Schoener, Connell found thatinterspeciﬁc competition was more prevalent in marine than interrestrial organisms, and also that it was more prevalent in largethan in small organisms.
Taken together, Schoener’s and Connell’s reviews certainly 
seem to indicate that active, current interspeciﬁc competition 
is widespread. Its percentage occurrence amongst species isadmittedly lower than its percentage occurrence amongst wholestudies. However, this is to be expected, since, for example, if four species are arranged along a single niche dimension and all adjacent species competed with each other, this would still beonly three out of six (or 50%) of all possible pairwise interactions.
Connell also found, however, that in
studies of just one pair of species,interspeciﬁc competition was almostalways apparent, whereas with morespecies the prevalence dropped markedly (from more than 90%to less than 50%). This can be explained to some extent by the
argument outlined above, but it may also indicate biases in theparticular pairs of species studied, and in the studies that are actually reported (or accepted by journal editors). It is highly likelythat many pairs of species are chosen for study because they are‘interesting’ (because competition between them is suspected) andif none is found this is simply not reported. Judging the preval-ence of competition from such studies is rather like judging theprevalence of debauched clergymen from the ‘gutter press’. Biasin the choice of studies is a real problem, only partially alleviated
••(b)Phytoplankton species diversity
0.3PH
Length of light interval (days)PL 3 6 9 120.40.50.60.70.8(a)
0.40.50.60.70.8
0.3
Figure 19.1 Average phytoplankton species diversity (Shannon
diversity index, ± SE) at the end of 49-day experiments (a) under
constant light conditions and (b) under ﬂuctuating light intensity.
PH, permanent high light intensity; PL, permanent low lightintensity. (After Floder et al. , 2002.)literature reviews
suggest competitionis widespread . . .
. . . but are the databiased?EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 551552 CHAPTER 19
in investigations of larger groups of species when a number 
of ‘negatives’ can be conscientiously reported alongside one or afew ‘positives’. Thus the results of surveys, such as those bySchoener and Connell, exaggerate, to an unknown extent, the frequency of competition.
As previously noted, phytophagous
insects were poorly represented in
Schoener’s data, but reviews of phyto-phagous insects have tended to suggesteither that competition is relatively rarein the group overall (Strong et al. , 1984)
or at least in certain types of phyto-
phagous insects, for example ‘leaf-biters’ (Denno et al., 1995). There
are also examples of ‘vacant niches’ for phytophagous insects: feed-
ing sites or feeding modes on a widespread plant that are utilizedby insects in one part of the world, but not in another part of theworld where the native insect fauna is different (Figure 19.2). Thisfailure to saturate the niche space also argues against a powerfulrole for interspeciﬁc competition. On a more general level, it hasbeen suggested that herbivores as a whole are seldom food-limited,
and are therefore not likely to compete for common resources(Hairston et al. , 1960; Slobodkin et al. , 1967; see Section 20.2.5).
The bases for this suggestion are the observations that green plantsare normally abundant and largely intact, they are rarely devas-tated, and most herbivores are scarce most of the time. Schoenerfound the proportion of herbivores exhibiting interspeciﬁc com-
petition to be signiﬁcantly lower than the proportions of plants,carnivores or detritivores.
Taken overall, therefore, current interspeciﬁc competition
has been reported in studies on a wide range of organisms and
in some groups its incidence may be particularly obvious, for exam-ple amongst sessile organisms in crowded situations. However,in other groups of organisms, interspeciﬁc competition mayhave little or no inﬂuence. It appears to be relatively rare amongherbivores generally, and particularly rare amongst some typesof phytophagous insect.
19.2.2 Structuring power of competition
Even when competition is potentially
intense, the species concerned maynevertheless coexist. This has beenhighlighted in theoretical studies ofmodel communities in which species compete for patchy and
ephemeral resources, and in which species themselves haveaggregated distributions, with each species distributed independ-ently of the others (e.g. Atkinson & Shorrocks, 1981; Shorrocks& Rosewell, 1987; see Chapter 8). The species exhibited ‘currentcompetition’ (like that in Schoener’s and Connell’s surveys), in
•• ••PinnaRachis
Costa
Costule(c)
Chew Suck Mine GallParts of
plants –see
diagramFeeding methods
PinnaRachis
Costa
Costule(a)
Chew Suck Mine Gall
(   Rare)
PinnaRachis
Costa
Costule(b)
Chew Suck Mine Gall
Pinna,
‘leaf’ blade
Rachis,stem
Costa,
stalk of
pinna
Costule,
lateral veinsof pinna,joining costaFigure 19.2 Feeding sites and feeding
methods of herbivorous insects attacking
bracken ( Pteridium aquilinum ) on three
continents. (a) Skipwith Common innorthern England; the data are derived
from both a woodland and a more opensite. (b) Hombrom Bluff, a savannawoodland in Papua New Guinea. (c) SierraBlanca in the Sacramento Mountains ofNew Mexico and Arizona, USA; as atSkipwith, the data here are derived fromboth an open and a wooded site. Eachbracken insect exploits the frond in acharacteristic way. Chewers live externally
and bite large pieces out of the plant;suckers puncture individual cells or thevascular system; miners live inside tissues;and gall-formers do likewise but inducegalls. Feeding sites are indicated on thediagram of the bracken frond. Feeding sitesof species exploiting more than one part of the frond are joined by lines. 
/H17033, open
and woodland sites; 7, open sites only.
(After Lawton, 1984.)the strength of
competition is likely to vary from community to community
Atkinson andShorrock’ssimulationsEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 552THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 553
that the removal of one species led to an increase in the abund-
ance of others. But, despite the fact that competition coefﬁcientswere high enough to lead to competitive exclusion in a uniformenvironment, the patchy nature of the environment and theaggregative behaviors of individuals of the species made coexistence
possible without any niche differentiation. Thus, even if interspeciﬁccompetition is actually affecting the abundance of populations, itneed not determine the species composition of the community.In a ﬁeld study of 60 insect taxa (Diptera and Hymenoptera) thatexploit the patchy resources provided by 66 mushroom taxa,Wertheim et al. (2000) found insect coexistence could be explained
by intraspeciﬁc aggregation in the manner described above, whileresource partitioning was judged not to contribute detectably tobiodiversity.
On the other hand, even when
interspeciﬁc competition is absent or
difﬁcult to detect, this does not necess-arily mean that it is unimportant as a
structuring force. Species may not compete at present because selec-tion in the past favored an avoidance of competition, and thus adifferentiation of niches (Connell’s ‘ghost of competition past’ – see Chapter 8). Alternatively, unsuccessful competitors mayalready have been driven to extinction; the present, observed speciesmay then simply be those that are able to exist because they com-pete very little or not at all with other species. Furthermore, speciesmay compete only rarely (perhaps during population outbreaks),or only in localized patches of especially high density, but the results
of such competition may be crucial to their continued existenceat a particular location. In all of these cases, interspeciﬁc competi-tion must be seen as a powerful inﬂuence on community structure,affecting which species coexist and the precise nature of thosespecies. Yet, this inﬂuence will not be reﬂected in the level of current competition. It is clear that the intensity of current com-petition may sometimes be linked only weakly to the structur-ing power of competition within the community.
This weak link has led a number 
of community ecologists to carry outstudies on competition that do not relyon the existence of current competition.
The approach has been ﬁrst to predict what a community should
look like if interspeciﬁc competition was shaping it or had shapedit in the past, and then to examine real communities to see whetherthey conform to these predictions.
The predictions themselves emerge readily from conventional
competition theory (see Chapter 8).
1Potential competitors that coexist in a community should, at
the very least, exhibit niche differentiation (see Section 19.2.3).
2This niche differentiation will often manifest itself as morpho-logical differentiation (see Section 19.2.4).
3Within any one community, potential competitors with little
or no niche differentiation would be unlikely to coexist. Theirdistributions in space should therefore be negatively associated:
each should tend to occur only where the other is absent (seeSection 19.2.5).
In the following sections, we will discuss studies that deal 
with the documentation of patterns consistent with a role for com-
petition in structuring communities.
19.2.3 Evidence from community patterns: 
niche differentiation
The various types of niche differentiation in animals and plants
were outlined in Chapter 8. On the one hand, resources may beutilized differentially. This may express itself directly within a single habitat, or as a difference in microhabitat, geographic dis-tribution or temporal appearance if the resources are themselves
separated spatially or temporally. Alternatively, species and theircompetitive abilities may differ in their responses to environmentalconditions. This too can express itself as either microhabitat,geographic or temporal differentiation, depending on the mannerin which the conditions themselves vary.
19.2.3.1 Niche complementarity
In one study of niche differentiation
and coexistence, a number of species ofanenome ﬁsh were examined nearMadang in Papua New Guinea (Elliott& Mariscal, 2001). This region has the
highest reported species richness ofboth anenome ﬁshes (nine) and theirhost anenomes (10). Each individual anenome is typically occu-pied by individuals of just one species of anenome ﬁsh becausethe residents aggressively exclude intruders (although aggressiveinteractions are less frequently observed between anenome ﬁshof very different sizes). Anenomes seem to be a limiting resourcefor the ﬁshes because almost all the anenomes were occupied,and when some were transplanted to new sites they were quickly
colonized and the abundance of adult ﬁsh increased. Surveys atthree replicate reef sites in four zones (nearshore, mid-lagoon, outerbarrier reef and offshore: Figure 19.3a) showed that each anenomeﬁsh was primarily associated with a particular species of anenomeand each showed a characteristic preference for a particular zone(Figure 19.3b). Different anenome ﬁsh that lived with the sameanenome were typically associated with different zones. Thus,Amphiprion percula occupied the anenome Heteractis magniﬁca in
nearshore zones, while A. perideraion occupied H. magniﬁca in 
offshore zones. Elliott and Mariscal concluded that coexistenceof the nine anenome ﬁshes on the limited anenome resource waspossible because of the differentiation of their niches, together withthe ability of small anenome ﬁsh species ( A. sandaracinos and A.
•• ••the ghost of
competition past
expectations fromcompetition theoryevidence fromcommunity patterns . . .. . . in anenomeﬁshes in Papua New Guinea, . . .EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 553•• ••554 CHAPTER 19
Figure 19.3 (a) Map showing the location of three replicate study sites in each of four zones within and outside Madang Lagoon 
(N, nearshore; M, mid-lagoon; O, outer barrier reef; OS, offshore reef ). The white areas indicate water, heavy stippling repres ents coral
reef and light stippling represents land. (b) The percentage of three common species of anenome ( Heteractis magniﬁca , H. crispa and
Stichodactyla mertensii ) occupied by different anemone ﬁsh species ( Amphiprion spp., in key on left) in each of four zones. The number of
anenomes censused in each zone is shown by n. (After Elliott & Mariscal, 2001.)
OS 3O3
O2
M1N1N2N3
M2
01M3
OS 1
OS 1
Bismark SeaNagada
Harbor
MadangLagoon
Madang
145° 50′ E5° 13′ SN 0 1 km(a)
Anemones occupied by each fish species (%)(b)
100
75
50
25
0
n = 102 n = 7 n = 80 n = 8
Stichodactyla mertensiiHeteractis crispa100
75
50
25
0
n = 4 n = 80 n = 28 n = 80
100
75
50
25
0
n = 4 n = 25 n = 54 n = 17Heteractis magnifica
Nearshore Offshore Outer barrier Mid-lagoonFish species
A. clarkii A. chrysopterus
A. leucokranos A. melanopusMiddleTop
A. percula A. perideraion
A. clarkii A. chrysopterus
A. sandaracinos A. leucokranosBottomEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 554•• ••THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 555
leucokranos ) to cohabit the same anenome with larger species. The
pattern is consistent with what would be expected of communities
molded by competition (speciﬁcally predictions 1 and 3 above).
Two further points, illustrated by the anenome ﬁsh, are worth
highlighting. First, they can be considered to be a guild, in that
they are a group of species that exploit the same class of envir-onmental resources in a similar way (Root, 1967). If interspeciﬁccompetition is to occur at all, or if it has occurred in the past,then it will be most likely to occur, or to have occurred, withinguilds. But this does not mean that guild members necessarily com-
pete or have necessarily competed: the onus is on ecologists todemonstrate that this is the case.
The second point about the anenome ﬁsh is that they demon-
strate niche complementarity . That is, within the guild as a whole,
niche differentiation involves several niche dimensions, and species
that occupy a similar position along one dimension (anenomespecies used) tend to differ along another dimension (zone occu-pied). Complementary differentiation along several dimensions hasalso been reported for guilds as diverse as lizards (Schoener, 1974),bumblebees (Pyke, 1982), bats (McKenzie & Rolfe, 1986), rainforestcarnivores (Ray & Sunquist, 2001) and tropical trees (Davies et al. , 1998), as described next.
19.2.3.2 Niche differentiation in space
Trees vary in their capacity to use
resources such as light, water andnutrients. A study in Borneo of 11 tree
species in the genus Macaranga showed marked differentiation 
in light requirements, from extremely high light-demanding
species such as M. gigantea to shade-tolerant species such as 
M. kingii (Figure 19.4a). The average light levels intercepted by the
crowns of these trees tended to increase as they grew larger, butthe ranking of the species did not change. The shade-tolerant specieswere smaller (Figure 19.4b) and persisted in the understory,rarely establishing in disturbed microsites (e.g. M. kingii ), in con-
trast to some of the larger, high-light species that are pioneers oflarge forest gaps (e.g. M. gigantea ). Others were associated with
intermediate light levels and can be considered small gap specialists
(e.g. M. trachyphylla ). The Macaranga species were also differen-
tiated along a second niche gradient, with some species being morecommon on clay-rich soils and others on sand-rich soils (Figure19.4b). This differentiation may be based on nutrient availability(generally higher in clay soils) and/or soil moisture availability(possibly lower in the clay soils because of thinner root mats andhumus layers). As with the anenome ﬁsh, there is evidence of nichecomplementarity among the Macaranga species. Thus, species 
with similar light requirements differed in terms of preferred soil textures, especially in the case of the shade-tolerant species.
The apparent niche partitioning by Macaranga species was partly
related to horizontal heterogeneity in resources (light levels in rela-tion to gap size, distribution of soil types) and partly to verticalheterogeneity (height achieved, depth of root mat).
Ectomycorrhizal fungi have also been shown to exploit
resources differentially in the vertical plane in the ﬂoor of a pine(Pinus resinosa ) forest. Until recently, it was not possible to study
the in situ distribution of ectomycorrhizal hyphae, but now DNA
analyses allow the identiﬁcation of putative species (even in theabsence of species names) and permit their distributions to be com-pared. The forest soil had a well-developed litter layer above afermentation layer (the F layer) and a thin humiﬁed layer (the H layer), with mineral soil beneath (the B horizon). Of the 26 speciesseparated by the DNA analysis, some were very largely restrictedto the litter layer (group A in Figure 19.5), others to the F layer
(group D), the H layer (group E) or the B horizon (group F). The remaining species were more general in their distributions(groups B and C).
19.2.3.3 Niche differentiation in time
Intense competition may, in theory, 
be avoided by partitioning resources inhorizontal or vertical space, as in theexamples above, orin time (Kronfeld-
Schor & Dayan, 2003), for example, by a staggering of life cycles
through the year. It is notable that two species of mantids, whichfeature as predators in many parts of the world, commonly coexistboth in Asia and North America. Tenodera sinensis and Mantis 
religiosa have life cycles that are 2–3 weeks out of phase. To test
the hypothesis that this asynchrony serves to reduce interspeciﬁccompetition, the timing of their egg hatch was experimentally synchronized in replicated ﬁeld enclosures (Hurd & Eisenberg,1990). T. sinensis , which normally hatches earlier, was unaffected
by M. religiosa . In contrast, the survival and body size of M. 
religiosa declined in the presence of T. sinensis . Because these 
mantids are both competitors for shared resources and predators
of each other, the outcome of this experiment probably reﬂectsa complex interaction between the two processes.
In plants too, resources may be 
partitioned in time. Thus, tundra plantsgrowing in nitrogen-limited conditionsin Alaska were differentiated in their timing of nitrogen uptake, as well as the soil depth from whichit was extracted and the chemical form of nitrogen used. To tracehow tundra species differed in their uptake of different nitrogensources, McKane et al. (2002) injected three chemical forms
labeled with the rare isotope 
15N (inorganic ammonium, nitrate
and organic glycine) at two soil depths (3 and 8 cm) on two occa-
sions ( June 24 and August 7) in a 3 ×2×2 factorial design.
Concentration of the 15N tracer was measured in each of ﬁve 
common tundra plants in 3–6 replicates of each treatment 7 daysafter application. The ﬁve plants proved to be well differentiated in. . . in trees in
Borneo, . . .. . . in preyingmantids in NorthAmerica . . .
. . . and in tundraplants in AlaskaEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 555•• ••556 CHAPTER 19
their use of nitrogen sources (Figure 19.6). Cottongrass ( Eriophorum
vaginatum ) and the cranberry bush ( Vaccinium vitis-idaea ) both relied
on a combination of glycine and ammonium, but cranberry
obtained more of these forms early in the growing season and ata shallower depth than cottongrass. The evergreen shrub Ledum
palustre and the dwarf birch ( Betula nana ) used mainly ammonium
but L. palustre obtained more of this form early in the season while
the birch exploited it later. Finally, the grass Carex bigelowii was
the only species to use mainly nitrate. Here, niche complement-
arity can be seen along three niche dimensions and differences intiming of use may help explain the coexistence of these specieson a limited resource.
19.2.3.4 Niche differentiation – apparent or real? Null models
Many cases of apparent resource parti-
tioning have been reported. It is likely,however, that studies failing to detectsuch differentiation have tended to gounpublished. It is always possible, of
course, that these ‘unsuccessful’ studies
are ﬂawed and incomplete, and that they have failed to deal with the relevant niche dimensions; but a number have beensufﬁciently beyond reproach to raise the possibility that in certain groups resource partitioning is not an important feature.Strong (1982) studied a group of hispine beetles (Chrysomelidae)that commonly coexist as adults in the rolled leaves of Heliconia
plants. These long-lived tropical beetles are closely related, eat the same food and occupy the same habitat. They would appear
to be good candidates for demonstrating resource partitioning.Yet, Strong could ﬁnd no evidence of segregation, except in thecase of just one of the 13 species studied, which was segregatedweakly from a number of others. The beetles lack any aggressivebehavior, either within or between species; their host speciﬁcitydoes not change as a function of co-occupancy of leaves with otherspecies that might be competitors; and the levels of food and habitat are commonly not limiting for these beetles, which suffer heavily from parasitism and predation. In these species,resource partitioning associated with interspeciﬁc competition doesnot appear to structure the community. As we have seen, thismay well be true of many phytophagous insect communities. Plant
Figure 19.4 (right ) (a) Percentage of individuals in each of 
ﬁve crown illumination classes for 11 Macaranga species (sample
sizes in parentheses). (b) Three-dimensional distribution of the 11
species with respect to maximum height, the proportion of stemsin high light levels (class 5 in (a)) and proportion of stems in sand-
rich soils. Each species of Macaranga is denoted by a single letter: 
G, gigantean ; W, winkleri ; H, hosei ; Y, hypoleuca ; T, triloba ; 
B, beccariana ; A, trachyphylla ; K, kingii ; U, hullettii ; V, havilandii ; 
L, lamellata . (After Davies et al. , 1998.)
% all trees
High light
Crown illumination indexLow light(a)
5 4 3 2 160
02.0
K (n = 20)60
02.1
L (n = 255)60
02.6
U (n = 229)60
02.8
V (n = 103)60
03.2
A (n = 226)60
03.5
B (n = 222)60
03.4
T (n = 215)60
03.6
Y (n = 35)60
04.0
H (n = 115)60
04.0
W (n = 103)60
0Mean Cl = 4.2
G (n = 42)
30
20
10
7565554535
40302010030
20
10
0
% trees in high light% trees onsand-rich soilsMaximum tree height (m)GWH
Y T A
BK
U
L
V(b)the aim of
demonstrating that patterns are not generated merely by chanceEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 556••THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 557
studies involving taxa as diverse as phytoplankton (see Figure 19.1)
and trees (Brokaw & Busing, 2000) have similarly failed to pro-vide evidence consistent with a strong role for niche partitioningin promoting coexistence and species diversity. Whilst patternsconsistent with a niche differentiation hypothesis are reasonably
widespread, they are by no means universal.
Moreover, a number of workers,
notably Simberloff and Strong, havecriticized what they see as a tendencyto interpret ‘mere differences’ as con-ﬁrming the importance of interspeciﬁc
competition. Such reports beg the question of whether the dif-ferences are large enough or regular enough to be different fromwhat might be found at random among a set of species. This prob-
lem led to an approach known as null model analysis (Gotelli, 2001).
Null models are models of actual communities that retain certainof the characteristics of their real counterparts, but reassemble thecomponents at random, speciﬁcally excluding the consequencesof biological interactions. In fact, such analyses are attempts tofollow a much more general approach to scientiﬁc investigation,
namely the construction and testing of null hypotheses. The idea
(familiar to most readers in a statistical context) is that the dataare rearranged into a form (the null model) representing what the data would look like in the absence of the phenomenon 
under investigation (in this case species interactions, particularlyinterspeciﬁc competition). Then, if the actual data show a signi-ﬁcant statistical difference from the null hypothesis, the nullhypothesis is rejected and the action of the phenomenon underinvestigation is strongly inferred. Rejecting (or falsifying) theabsence of an effect is reckoned to be better than conﬁrming its presence, because there are well-established statistical methodsfor testing whether things are signiﬁcantly different (allowingfalsiﬁcation) but none for testing whether things are ‘signiﬁcantly
similar’.
Lawlor (1980) looked at 10 North
American lizard communities, consist-ing of 4–9 species, for which he had estimates of the amounts of each of 
••Unknown TRFLP 009
Unknown TRFLP 010
Ramaria concolor
Unknown TRFLP 007
Amanita rubescens
Unknown TRFLP 015Russula sp. (white 2)
Amanita vaginataUnknown TRFLP 013Clavarioid 2Suillus intermediusUnknown TRFLP 014Unknown TRFLP 004Cenococcum geophilumClavulina cristataUnknown TRFLP 003Russula sp. (white 1)Scleroderma citrinumUnknown TRFLP 002Unknown TRFLP 001Trichoderma sp.Unknown TRFLP 005Lactarius sp.Unknown TRFLP 006Unknown TRFLP 008Tylopilus felleus
Percentage occurrences100 0 20 40 60 80Species Vertical distribution Group
A
B
C
D
E
F
Litter
F layerH layer
B horizonFigure 19.5 The vertical distribution 
of 26 ectomycorrhizal fungal species in 
the ﬂoor of a pine forest determined by DNA analysis. Most have not beennamed formally but are shown as a code
(TRFLP, terminal restriction fragmentlength polymorphism). The verticaldistribution histograms show thepercentage of occurrences of each speciesin litter, the F layer, the H layer and the Bhorizon. (After Dickie et al. , 2002.)
null hypotheses are
intended to ensurestatistical rigor
a null model of foodresource use in lizardcommunities . . .EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 557558 CHAPTER 19
20 food categories consumed by each species in each com-
munity (data from Pianka, 1973). A number of null models of these communities were created (see below), which were thencompared with their real counterparts in terms of their pat-terns of overlap in resource use. If competition is or has been 
a signiﬁcant force in determining community structure, theniches should be spaced out, and overlap in resource use in the real communities should be less than predicted by the nullmodels.Lawlor’s analysis was based on the ‘electivities’ of the consumer
species, where the electivity of species ifor resource k was the
proportion of the diet of species iwhich consisted of resource k.
Electivities therefore ranged from 0 to 1. These electivities were
in turn used to calculate, for each pair of species in a community,
an index of resource-use overlap, which itself varied between 0(no overlap) and 1 (complete overlap). Finally, each communitywas characterized by a single value: the mean resource overlapfor all pairs of species present.
•• ••Uptake of available soil nitrogen (% of each species’  total)
Available soil nitrogen (% of total)
Available
soil nitrogen100
020406080(a)
100
020406080
100
020406080100
020406080(b)
100
020406080100
020406080(c)
Carex
EriophorumVacciniumLedum Betula3 cm 8 cmJune AugustGlycine Ammonium Nitrate
Figure 19.6 Mean uptake of available soil
nitrogen ( ± SE) in terms of (a) chemical
form, (b) timing of uptake and (c) depth 
of uptake by the ﬁve most common species in tussock tundra in Alaska. Data
are expressed as the percentage of eachspecies’ total uptake (left panels) or as thepercentage of the total pool of nitrogenavailable in the soil (right panels). (After McKane et al. , 2002.)EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 558THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 559
The null models were of four
types, generated by four ‘reorganization
algorithms’ (RA1–RA4, Figure 19.7).Each retained a different aspect of the
structure of the original community whilst randomizing the
remaining aspects of resource use.
RA1 retained the minimum amount of original community
structure. Only the original number of species and the originalnumber of resource categories were retained. Observed elec-tivities (including zeros) were replaced in every case by random values between 0 and 1. This meant that there were far fewerzeros than in the original community. The niche breadth of eachspecies was therefore increased.
RA2 replaced all electivities, except zeros , with random values.
Thus, the qualitative degree of specialization of each consumer
was retained (i.e. the number of resources consumed to any extentby each species was correct).
RA3 retained not only the original qualitative degree of 
specialization but also the original consumer niche breadths. Norandomly generated electivities were used. Instead, the originalsets of values were rearranged. In other words, for each consumer,
all electivities, both zeros and non-zeros, were randomly reassignedto the different resource types.
RA4 reassigned only the non-zero electivities. Of all the algo-
rithms, this one retained most of the original community structure.
Each of the four algorithms was applied to each of the 10 
communities. In every one of these 40 cases, 100 ‘null model’ 
communities were generated and the corresponding 100 mean values of resource overlap were calculated. If competition wereimportant in the real community, these mean overlaps shouldexceed the real community value. The real community was there-fore considered to have a signiﬁcantly lower mean overlap than
the null model ( P<0.05) if ﬁve or fewer of the 100 simulations
gave mean overlaps less than the real value.
The results are shown in Figure 19.7.
Increasing the niche breadths of all
consumers (RA1) resulted in the high-est mean overlaps (signiﬁcantly higherthan the real communities). Rearranging the observed non-zeroelectivities (RA2 and RA4) also always resulted in mean overlaps
•• ••. . . based on four
‘reorganizationalgorithms’
the lizards appear topass the test . . .Mean overlap in resource use, α9 7 5040.9
60.8
0.70.60.50.4
0.30.20.1
8RA1
9 7 5040.9
60.8
0.70.60.50.4
0.30.20.1
8RA2
9 7 5040.6
60.5
0.4
0.30.20.1
8RA4
9 7 5040.6
60.5
0.4
0.30.20.1
8RA3
Number of species in the community
Figure 19.7 The mean indices of resource-use overlap for each of Pianka’s (1973) 10 North American lizard communities are shown as
solid circles. These can be compared, in each case, with the mean (horizontal line), standard deviation (vertical rectangle) an d range
(vertical line) of mean overlap values for the corresponding set of 100 randomly constructed communities. The analysis was perf ormed
using four different reorganization algorithms (RAs), as described in the text. (After Lawlor, 1980.)EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 559••560 CHAPTER 19
that were signiﬁcantly higher than those actually observed. With
RA3, on the other hand, where all electivities were reassigned,the differences were not always signiﬁcant. But in all communities,the algorithm mean was higher than the observed mean. In thecase of these lizard communities, therefore, the observed low over-
laps in resource use suggest that the niches are segregated, andthat interspeciﬁc competition plays an important role in communitystructure.
A study similar to that in Figure 19.7
concerned spatial and temporal nichepartitioning in grassland ant communit-ies in Oklahoma (Albrecht & Gotelli,
2001). In this case, there was little evidence of niche partitioningon a seasonal basis. However, on a smaller spatial scale, at indi-
vidual bating stations there was signiﬁcantly less spatial niche over-lap than expected by chance. This pattern of results – sometimesa role for competition is conﬁrmed, sometimes not – has beenthe general conclusion from the null model approach.
19.2.4 Evidence from morphological patterns
Where niche differentiation is mani-
fested as morphological differentiation,the spacing out of niches can be expectedto have its counterpart in regularity inthe degree of morphological difference
between species belonging to a guild.
Speciﬁcally, a common feature claimed for animal guilds that appearto segregate strongly along a single-resource dimension is that adjacent species tend to exhibit regular differences in body sizeor in the size of feeding structures. Hutchinson (1959) was theﬁrst to catalog many examples, drawn from vertebrates andinvertebrates, of sequences of potential competitors in whichaverage individuals from adjacent species had weight ratios ofapproximately 2.0 or length ratios of approximately 1.3 (the cube
root of 2.0). This ‘rule’ also seems to hold approximately for guildsas different as coexisting cuckoo-doves (mean body weight ratioof 1.9; Diamond, 1975), bumblebees (mean proboscis lengthratio for worker bees of 1.32; Pyke, 1982), weasels (mean caninediameter ratio of between 1.23 and 1.50; Dayan et al. , 1989) and
even fossil brachiopods (between 1.48 and 1.57 for body outlinelength, an index of the size of the brachiopod’s feeding organ;Hermoyian et al. , 2002). Models of competition do not predict
speciﬁc values for size ratios that might apply across a range oforganisms and environments, and whether the apparent regular-ity is an empirical quirk usually remains to be determined. In the case of the brachiopod community (Figure 19.8), however,Hermoyian et al. (2002) built 100,000 null models that each 
drew four species at random from the complete strophomenide 
brachiopod fossil fauna (74 taxa) and calculated size ratiosbetween adjacent species. On the basis of their results, they
••rejected the null hypothesis ( P<0.03) that the observed ratios could
have arisen from randomly selected taxa, supporting the hypo-
thesis of limiting similarity.
If interspeciﬁc competition does in
fact shape a community, it will often 
do so through a process of selectiveextinction. Species that are too similarwill simply fail to persist together. The detailed records ofornithologists from the six main Hawaiian islands during the period1860–1980 allowed Moulton and Pimm (1986) to estimate, at least to the nearest decade, when each species of passerine birdwas introduced and if and when it became extinct. In therecords, overall, there were 18 pairs of congeneric species pre-sent at the same time on the same island. Of these, six pairs 
persisted together; in nine cases one species became extinct; and in three cases both species died out (the last category wasignored in the analysis because the outcome is not compatiblewith pairwise competitive exclusion). In cases where one spe-cies became extinct the species pair was morphologically more similar than in cases where both species persisted: the average percentage difference in bill length was 9 and 22%, respectively.This statistically signiﬁcant result is consistent with the com-petition hypothesis.
Moulton and Pimm’s approach was informative because it
invoked historical data, providing a glimpse of the elusive work-ings of the ‘ghost of competition past’. An evolutionary perspect-ive has been even more explicitly incorporated by the use of 
‘cladistic analysis’, which allows us to reconstruct phylogenies (evolutionary trees) based on similarities and differences betweenspecies in their DNA molecules and/or in morphological (orother biologically meaningful) characteristics.
Frequency18
03691215
In SOL (ln mm)2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0
Figure 19.8 Distributions of strophomenide body outline length
(SOL) of samples of four coexisting species of strophomenide
brachiopods collected from a late Ordovician ( c. 448–438 million
years before present) marine sediment in Indiana, USA. Thespecies shown, from left to right, are Eochonetes clarksvillensis ,
Leptaena richmondensis , Strophomena planumbona and Raﬁnesquina
alternata . (After Hermoyian et al. , 2002.). . . whereas grassland
ants do not
Hutchinson’s ‘rule’about size ratios ofcoexisting speciesapplied tobrachiopods
are extinctions morelikely for very similarcompetitors?EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 560••THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 561
The results of such an analysis 
of the Anolis lizards of Puerto Rico
(Figure 19.9a) are consistent with the
hypothesis of divergent evolution inbody size (Losos, 1992). The two-
species stage in evolution (the ﬁrst, lowermost node in Figure 19.9a)
was composed of species with markedly different snout–ventlengths (SVL – a standard index of size for lizards) of approximately38 and 64 mm ( A. occultus and the ancestor of all the remaining
types, respectively) whilst sizes at the three-species stage (the next node) were 38, 64 and 127 mm. In Jamaica, on the other hand(Figure 19.9b), no such pattern is observed; the two- and three-species stages were composed of species of similar size (61 and73 mm, then 57, 61 and 73 mm SVL). However, the phylogenies
of the two islands show remarkable consistency when viewed fromthe point of view of patterns in ‘ecomorphs’ – each distinct in morphology, ecology and behavior. On both islands, the two-morphstage was composed of a short-legged twig ecomorph, which crawlsslowly on narrow supports on the periphery of trees, and a generalist ancestral species. At the three-morph stage, too, bothislands possessed the same assembly – a twig ecomorph, one specialized at foraging in the tree crown and a trunk–ground type,the latter being robust and long-legged and using its jumping and running abilities to forage on the ground. At the four-morphstage the patterns were again identical, each having added a trunk–crown type. Only at the ﬁve-morph stage was there a difference– the grass–bush morph was the last to evolve on Puerto Rico,
but its counterpart has never appeared on Jamaica (Figure 19.10).Note that on each island a morph usually consists of a single speciesof Anolis , but Puerto Rico has several trunk–ground and grass–
bush species. This phylogenetic analysis is consistent with thehypothesis that the faunal assembly on both Puerto Rico andJamaica has occurred via sequential microhabitat partitioning, withmorphological differences perhaps being related to differences inmicrohabitat utilization. Extending this work to further islands,
Losos et al. (1998) conﬁrmed that adaptive radiation in similar envir-
onments can produce strikingly similar evolutionary outcomes.
19.2.5 Evidence from negatively associated distributions
A number of studies have used pat-terns in distribution as evidence for the importance of interspeciﬁc com-petition. Foremost amongst these isDiamond’s (1975) survey of the land
birds living on the islands of the Bismarck Archipelago off the coast of New Guinea. The most striking evidence comes fromdistributions that Diamond refers to as ‘checkerboard’. In these,two or more ecologically similar species (i.e. members of the same guild) have mutually exclusive but interdigitating distribu-tions such that any one island supports only one of the species(or none at all). Figure 19.11 shows this for two small, ecolog-ically similar cuckoo-dove species: Macropygia mackinlayi and 
M. nigrirostris.
A null model approach to the analysis of distributional differ-
ences involves comparing the pattern of species co-occurrences
at a suite of locations with that which would be expected by chance.An excess of negative associations would then be consistent witha role for competition in determining community structure.
Thorough censuses of both native
and exotic (introduced) plants occurringon 23 small islands in Lake Manapouriin the South Island of New Zealand(Wilson, 1988b), were the basis for com-puting a standard index of association for every pair of species:
d
ik=(Oik−Eik)/SDik (19.1)
••evidence from the
divergent evolutionof lizards on islands61grahami (tc)
73valencienni (tw)
57lineatopus (tg)
108garmani (cg)
48opalinus (tc)(b)
64cristatellus (tg)
38occultus (tw)(a)
127cuvieri (cg)
62evermanni (tc)
65gundlachi (tg)
44poncensis (gb)
44pulchellus (gb)
49krugi (gb)
45stratulus (tc)
Figure 19.9 Phylogenies of lizards in the genus Anolis (a) on Puerto Rico and (b) on Jamaica. For each species, size (snout–vent length, mm)
and ecomorph are shown: cg, crown-giant; gb, grass–bush; tc, trunk–crown; tg, trunk–ground; tw, twig. (After Losos, 1992.)
evidence from
‘checkerboard’distributions in . . .. . . island birds . . .
. . . and native andexotic plants onislands in a lakeEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 561•• ••562 CHAPTER 19
(b)
Trunk–
groundCrown-
giantTwig Trunk–
crown
Crown
GenTwig Generalist
Trunk–
groundTwig Crown
GenCrown-
giantTwig Trunk–
ground
Gen
Crown-
giantTrunk–
crownTwig Trunk–
ground
TG
Gen
Crown-
giantGrass–
bushTwig Trunk–
ground
TG
GenTrunk–
crown
TGTwig Generalist
Four-morph stage
Five-morph stageThree-morph stage(a)
Two-morph stage(a)
Figure 19.10 The evolution of Anolis communities (a) on Puerto Rico and (b) on Jamaica for two-, three-, four- and, in the case of 
Puerto Rico, ﬁve-ecomorph communities. Labels at nodes in the trees are the estimated ecological characteristics of the ancesto rs. 
(After Losos, 1992.)
153°E6°S
147°E3°S0°
150°ENew GuineaNew BritainOO
OO
OO
OM
M
MM
M
NOO
O
O
OO
NMM
N NMNNMM M
M
MMM. mackinlayi
M. nigrirostrisNeitherM
N
O
Figure 19.11 Checkerboard distribution
of two small Macropygia cuckoo-dove
species in the Bismarck region. Islands
whose pigeon faunas are known aredesignated as M ( M. mackinlayi resident), 
N (M. nigrirostris resident) or O (neither
species resident). Note that most islands
have one of these species, no island hasboth and some islands have neither. (After Diamond, 1975.)EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 562••THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 563
where dikis the difference between the observed ( Oik) and the
expected ( Eik) number of islands shared by species iand k,
expressed in terms of the standard deviation of the expected
number (SDik).
The resulting sets of association values for the real commun-
ities of native and exotic species are presented as histograms inFigure 19.12. These can be compared with null model commun-ities in which island species richnesses and species frequencies of
occurrence were ﬁxed at those observed, but species occurrenceson islands were randomized (Wilson, 1987). One thousand ran-domizations were performed, yielding a mean frequency in eachd
ikcategory (the circles in Figure 19.12). The analysis of native
plants showed an excess of negative associations (highly statistic-
ally signiﬁcant for the bottom four categories) and of positive associations (highly signiﬁcant for the top ﬁve categories), witha corresponding deﬁcit of associations near zero. In contrast, the
analysis of exotic plants showed no signiﬁcant departure from thenull model.
In the case of native species, the excess of negative asso-
ciations is consistent with the action of competitive exclusion, and this is particularly likely for the woody species. However, wecannot rule out an explanation based on a tendency of particu-lar pairs of species to occur in different habitats, which themselvesare not represented on every island (Wilson, 1988b). The mostlikely explanation for the excess of positive associations amongst
native plants is a tendency for certain species to occur in the samehabitats. The agreement of exotic species with the null model mayreﬂect their generally weedy status and effective colonization abil-ities, or it may indicate that the exotics have not yet reached anequilibrium distribution (Wilson, 1988b).The number of checkerboard pairs in a community can be read-
ily calculated by counting the number of unique pairs of species
that never co-occur. A less strict version of Diamond’s assemblyrule that ‘some pairs of species never coexist’ can be assessed usingthe C score of Stone and Roberts (1990). This index also measuresthe degree to which species co-occur but does not require per-fect segregation between species. The C score is calculated foreach pair of species as ( R
i−S)(Rj−S) where Riand Rjare the 
number of sites where species iand joccur, and Sis the number
of sites in which both species co-occur. This score is then 
averaged over all possible pairs of species in the matrix. For a community structured by competitive interactions, the number
of checkerboard pairs should be greater and the C score shouldbe larger than expected by chance.
Gotelli and McCabe (2002) checked
the generality of negatively associateddistributions (in support of a structur-ing role for competition) in a meta-analysis of various taxonomicgroups in 96 data sets that reported the distribution of species assem-blages across sets of replicated sites. For every real data set, 1000randomized versions were prepared and an index of association
d
ikwas computed (as in Wilson, 1988b) but Gotelli and McCabe
called this index the standardized effect size (SES). The results of
this analysis for all 96 data sets together support the predictionsthat the C score and the number of checkerboard pairs shouldbe larger than expected by chance (Figure 19.13a, b). The null
hypothesis in each case is that the mean SES should be zero (realcommunities not different from simulated communities) andthat 95% of the values should lie between −2.0 and +2.0. The null
hypothesis can be rejected in both cases. Figure 19.13c shows that
••Figure 19.12 A comparison between the
observed values of association between
pairs of (a) native plant species and (b) exotic plant species on islands in Lake Manapouri (histograms), and the
distributions expected on the basis of aneutral model (
7). (After Wilson, 1988b.)
Frequency
4 00–20.10.20.3
2(a)
4 00–20.10.20.3
2(b)
Association
comparison of
taxonomic groupsEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 563564 CHAPTER 19
plants and homeothermic vertebrates tend to have higher SESs
for the C score, indicating stronger tendencies towards negativespecies associations than the poikilotherms have (invertebrates,ﬁsh and reptiles), with the exception of ants.
Gotelli and McCabe (2002) do not go so far as to claim they
have performed a deﬁnitive test of the role of competition. They
note that some species may exhibit ‘habitat checkerboards’because they have afﬁnities to nonoverlapping habitats. Others
may reveal ‘historical checkerboards’, co-occurring infrequentlybecause of restricted dispersal since allopatric speciation (i.e. having speciated in different places). However, these results addfurther weight to a widespread role for competition in structur-ing communities.
19.2.6 Appraisal of the role of competition
We can now draw a number of conclusions about the evidence
for competition discussed in this section.
1Interspeciﬁc competition is a possible and indeed a plausible
explanation for many aspects of the organization of many com-munities – but it is not often a proven explanation.
2One of the main reasons for this is that active, current com-petition has been studied and demonstrated in only a smallnumber of communities. Its actual prevalence overall can bejudged only imperfectly from the results and considerationsdiscussed above.
3As an alternative to current competition, the ghost of com-petition past can always be invoked to account for present-daypatterns. But it can be invoked so easily because it is imposs-
ible to observe directly and therefore is difﬁcult to disprove.
4The communities chosen for study may not be typical. The ecologists observing them have usually been speciﬁcallyinterested in competition, and they may have selected appro-priate, ‘interesting’ systems. Studies that fail to show niche dif-ferentiation may often have been considered ‘unsuccessful’ andare likely to have gone largely unreported.
5The community patterns uncovered, even where they appearto support the competition hypothesis, often have alternativeexplanations. For example, species that have negatively asso-ciated distributions may have recently speciated allopatric-ally, and their distributions may still be expanding into oneanother’s ranges.
6The recurring alternative explanation to competition as the cause
of community patterns is that these have arisen simply bychance. Niche differentiation may occur because the variousspecies have evolved independently into specialists, and theirspecialized niches happen to be different. Even niches arrangedalong a resource dimension at random are bound to differ tosome extent. Similarly, species may differ in their distributionbecause each has been able, independently, to colonize andestablish itself in only a small proportion of the habitats thatare suitable for it. Ten blue and 10 red balls thrown at randominto 100 boxes are almost certain to end up with different dis-tributions. Hence, competition cannot be inferred from mere‘differences’ alone. But, what sorts of differences do allow the
action of competition to be inferred? This is the domain of thenull model approach.
•• ••Frequency(a)
20
15
10
5
0Frequency
Standardized effect size(b)
40
30
20
10
0Standardized effect size6
4
2
0
Birds Bats
MammalsAnts
InvertebratesFish
Amphibians andreptilesPlants(c)
Figure 19.13 Frequency histograms for standardized effect 
sizes measured for 96 presence–absence matrices taken from 
the literature in the case of (a) the C score and (b) the number of species pairs forming perfect checkerboard distributions. (c) Standardized effect sizes for the C score for different 
taxonomic groups. The dashed line indicates an effects size of 2.0, which is the approximate 5% signiﬁcance level. (After Gotelli & McCabe, 2002.)EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 564THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 565
7The aim of the null model approach, whether applied to
niche differentiation, morphological patterns or negativelyassociated distribution patterns, is undoubtedly worthy. Weneed to guard against the temptation to see competition in acommunity simply because we are looking for it. On the
other hand, the approach is bound to be of limited use unlessit is applied to groups (usually guilds) within which competi-tion may be expected. In its favor, the null model approachconcentrates the minds of investigators, and it can stop themfrom jumping to conclusions too readily. Ultimately, though,it can never take the place of a detailed understanding of theﬁeld ecology of the species in question, or of manipulative experiments designed to reveal competition by increasing orreducing species abundances (Law & Watkinson, 1989). It can
only be part of the community ecologist’s armory.
8Interspeciﬁc competition is certain to vary in importancefrom community to community: it has no single, generalrole. For example, it appears frequently to be important in vertebrate communities, particularly those of stable, species-rich environments, and in communities dominated by sessileorganisms such as plants and corals; whilst, for example, insome phytophagous insect communities it is less often import-ant. A challenge for the future is to understand why some guildsshow evidence for a role for competition, such as regularityin size ratios, whilst others do not (Hopf et al. , 1993).
9Finally, we should not lose sight of the fact that communityorganization in ﬁeld studies is almost certain to be inﬂuenced
by more than one kind of population interaction; for examplethe anenome ﬁsh (see Section 19.2.3.1) and ectomycorrhizalfungal cases (see Section 19.2.3.2) both involved mutualism aswell as competition, and the mantids in Section 19.2.3.3 wereintraguild predators as well as competitors. The interactionbetween predation and competition can be particularlyinﬂuential, as we shall see in Section 19.4.
19.3 Equilibrium and nonequilibrium views 
of community organization
It is possible to conceive of a world with just one species of plant
(or herbivore) with supreme performance over an enormousrange of tolerance. In this scenario the most competitive species(the one that is most efﬁcient at converting limited resources into descendants) would be expected to drive all less competitive
species to extinction. The species richness we witness in real com-munities is a clear demonstration of the failure of evolution toproduce such supreme species. An extension of this competitiveargument holds that diversity can be explained through a parti-tioning of resources amongst competing species whose requirementsdo not overlap completely, as discussed in detail in Section 19.2.However, this argument rests on two assumptions that are notnecessarily always valid.The ﬁrst assumption is that the organisms are actually com-
peting, which in turn implies that resources are limiting. But there
are many situations where physical disturbances, such as stormson a rocky shore or frequent ﬁres, may hold down the densitiesof populations so that resources are not limiting and individualsdo not compete for them. The role of physical disturbances, andthe associated patch dynamics view of communities, were discussedin Chapter 16. In an exactly analogous manner, the action of pred-ators or parasites is often a disturbance in the ‘normal’ course ofa competitive interaction; the resulting mortality may open up agap for colonization in a way that is sometimes indistinguishablefrom that of battering by waves on a rocky shore or a hurricanein a forest.
The second assumption is that when competition is operating
and resources are in limited supply, one species will inevitably
exclude another. But in the real world, when no year is exactlylike another, and no square centimeter of ground exactly the sameas the next, the process of competitive exclusion may not pro-ceed to its monotonous end. Any force that continually changesdirection at least delays, and may prevent, an equilibrium or astable conclusion being reached. Any force that simply interruptsthe process of competitive exclusion may prevent extinction andenhance species richness.
A basic distinction can thus be made
between equilibrium and nonequilibrium
theories. An equilibrium theory, likethe one concerned with niche differen-
tiation, helps us to focus attention on the properties of a systemat an equilibrium point – time and variation are not the centralconcern. A nonequilibrium theory, on the other hand, is concernedwith the transient behavior of a system away from an equilibriumpoint, and speciﬁcally focuses our attention on time and varia-tion. Of course, it would be naive to think that any real communityhas a precisely deﬁnable equilibrium point, and it is wrong to ascribethis view to researchers who are associated with equilibrium theories. The truth is that investigators who focus attention on
equilibrium points have in mind that these are merely states towardswhich systems tend to be attracted, but about which there may be greater or lesser ﬂuctuation. In one sense, therefore, thecontrast between equilibrium and nonequilibrium theories is a matter of degree. However, this difference of focus is instructivein unraveling the important role of temporal heterogeneity in communities.
Thus, predators and parasites, like physical disturbances, can
interrupt the process of competitive exclusion, inﬂuence profoundly
the outcome of competitive processes, and impose their own orderon community organization. Predation and parasitism can alsoaffect community structure through the process of ‘apparentcompetition’ (see Section 8.6), where one or more prey or hostspecies suffers from the actions of predators or parasites that aresustained by the presence of other species of prey or hosts. Weturn to predation and parasitism in the next two sections.
•• ••equilibrium and
nonequilibriumtheoriesEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 565566 CHAPTER 19
19.4 The inﬂuence of predation on community
structure
19.4.1 Effects of grazers
Lawn-mowers are relatively unselective predators capable of
maintaining a close-cropped sward of vegetation. Darwin (1859)was the ﬁrst to notice that the mowing of a lawn could maintaina higher richness of species than occurred in its absence. He wrotethat:
If turf which has long been mown, and the case would 
be the same with turf closely browsed by quadrupeds, be let to grow, the most vigorous plants gradually kill the less vigorous, though fully grown plants; thus out of20 species growing on a little plot of mown turf (3 feet by 4 feet) nine species perished from the other species beingallowed to grow up freely.
Grazing animals are usually more
choosy than lawn-mowers, and this is
clearly demonstrated by the occur-rence in the neighborhood of rabbit(Oryctolagus cuniculus ) burrows of plants
which for chemical or physical reasons are unacceptable as foodto the rabbits (including the poisonous deadly nightshade Atropa
belladonna and the stinging nettle Urtica dioica ). Nevertheless, many
grazers seem to have a similar general effect to lawn-mowers. Thus,in one experiment, grazing by oxen ( Bos taurus ) and zebu cows
(Bos taurus indicus ) in natural pasture in the Ethiopian highlands
was manipulated to provide a no-grazing control and four graz-ing intensity treatments (several replicates of each) in two sites.
Figure 19.14 shows how the mean number of plant species var-ied in the sites in October, the period when plant productivitywas at its highest (Mwendera et al., 1997). Signiﬁcantly more species
occurred at intermediate levels of grazing than where there wasno grazing or heavier grazing ( P<0.05). In the ungrazed plots,
several highly competitive plant species, including the grassBothriochloa insculpta , accounted for 75–90% of ground cover. 
At intermediate levels of grazing, however, the cattle apparentlykept the aggressive, competitively dominant grasses in check andallowed a greater number of plant species to persist. But at veryhigh intensities of grazing, species numbers were reduced as the cattle were forced to turn from heavily grazed, preferred plant species to less preferred species, driving some to extinction.Where grazing pressure was particularly intense, grazing-tolerantspecies such as Cynodon dactylon became dominant.
The composition of plant commun-
ities in different grazing regimesclearly depends on a variety of species
traits. First, competitively superior species can be expected to dominate in the absence of grazing. A particularly striking examplehas been provided by Paine (2002), who reported that the 
exclusion of macroherbivores (urchins, chitons and limpets)from a North American rocky intertidal zone caused the multi-species kelp community to collapse to a virtual monoculture of Alaria marginata ; this was 10 times more productive than its
grazed counterpart (86.0 versus 8.6 kg wet mass m
−2year−1).
Second, we have seen that plant species with physical or chemical
characteristics that deter grazers are likely to be more stronglyrepresented in grazed locations. Bullock et al. (2001) have also noted
that while certain dominant grasses decreased in importance in
response to sheep grazing, most dicotyledonous species increasedin abundance, at least at certain times of year. Moreover, summergrazing produced an increased representation of plant species bestable to colonize gaps.
When predation promotes the
coexistence of species amongst whichthere would otherwise be competitiveexclusion (because the densities ofsome or all of the species are reduced
to levels at which competition is relatively unimportant), this isknown generally as ‘ exploiter-mediated coexistence ’. Many examples
of this phenomenon have been reported, such as that in Figure 19.14,but grazer-mediated coexistence is far from universal. Proulxand Mazumder (1998) performed a meta-analysis of 44 reports ofthe effects of grazing on plant species richness from lake, stream,marine, grassland and forest ecosystems. Their conclusion was thatthe outcome was strongly related to whether the studies had been performed in nutrient-rich or nutrient-poor situations. All
•• ••grazing can increase
plant species richness(exploiter-mediatedcoexistence) . . .
Number of plant species25
4
Index of grazing intensity20
1015
53 2 1 0Site 1
Site 2
Figure 19.14 Mean species richness of pasture vegetation in 
plots subjected to different levels of cattle grazing in two sites in
the Ethiopian highlands in October. 0, no grazing; 1, light grazing; 2, moderate grazing; 3, heavy grazing; 4, very heavy grazing(estimated according to cattle stocking rates). (After Mwendera 
et al. , 1997.)
. . . but not alwaysexploiter-mediated
coexistence is morelikely in nutrient-richsituationsEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 566THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 567
19 studies from nonenriched or nutrient-poor ecosystems exhib-
ited signiﬁcantly lower species richness under high grazing thanunder low grazing (Figure 19.15a–c). In contrast, 14 of 25 com-parisons from enriched or nutrient-rich ecosystems showedsigniﬁcantly higher species richness under high grazing (indicat-
ing grazer-mediated coexistence) (Figure 19.15d–g). Nine of theremaining 11 nutrient-rich studies showed no difference with graz-ing regime whilst two showed a decline in species richness. Thelack of grazer-mediated coexistence in unproductive situations mayreﬂect the poor growth potential of the less competitive speciesthat, in nutrient-rich circumstances, would be released fromcompetitive domination as a result of grazing.
Osem et al. (2002) focused on the
interactive effects of grazing and pro-
ductivity in a study of annual herbaceousplant communities in Mediterraneansemiarid rangeland in Israel. They
recorded the response of the community to protection fromsheep grazing in four neighboring topographic situations –south-facing slopes, north-facing slopes, hilltops and wadi (drystream) shoulders (Figure 19.16). Annual above-ground primaryproductivity was measured each year for 4 years at the peak season in the four fenced subplots per site and was found to be
typical of semiarid ecosystems (10–200 g dry matter m
−2) except
on wadi shoulders (up to 700 g dry matter m−2). The measured
values were taken to represent ‘potential’ productivity in the adjacent grazed subplots. Grazing only increased plant species richness in the most productive site (wadi) (Figure 19.16d). In theother, less productive sites, species richness was unaffected or
declined with grazing. These results are consistent with thosereported by Proulx and Mazumder (1998) and support the long-standing proposal of Huston (1979) that grazing should changediversity in opposite ways in resource-poor and resource-rich ecosystems.
Figure 19.17a and b plots species richness in relation to poten-
tial productivity individually for all subplots and all years(because precipitation and productivity varied both spatially andtemporally) for both grazed and ungrazed locations. Under graz-
ing, species richness was positively related to productivity overthe whole range measured. In the absence of grazers, however,a positive relationship only occurred in low-productivity sites. Osemet al. (2002) hypothesize (Figure 19.17c) that at low productivity,
plant growth and diversity are limited by the soil resources of waterand nutrients, while at higher productivity (with its associated larger
•• ••
Plant species richness10
8
6
4
2
0
Grazing intensityHigh Low(a)
25
20
15
10
5
0
Grazing intensityHigh Low(b)
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
Grazing intensityHigh Low(c)Plant species richness2.5
2
1.5
1
Grazing intensityLow(d)
Intermediate High20304050
Grazing intensityLow(f)
Intermediate High6590
85
80
75
70
Grazing intensityLow(g)
Intermediate High2.57.512.517.522.5
Grazing intensityLow(e)
Intermediate High
Figure 19.15 (a–c) Species richness under contrasting grazing pressure (low or high) in nonenriched or nutrient-poor ecosystems. The
different lines show the results of different aquatic or terrestrial studies and are presented in three panels simply for clari ty. (d–g) Species
richness under contrasting grazing pressure (low, intermediate or high) in various enriched or nutrient-rich ecosystems. (After  Proulx &
Mazumder, 1998.)
community responses
to grazing depend onproductivity . . .EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 567••568 CHAPTER 19
biomass) competition is predominantly for the canopy resource
of light. Thus, in the low productivity range, richness was eitherunaffected or reduced by grazing, probably because of plantremoval and trampling. In the high productivity wadi sites, how-ever, species richness continued to increase with grazing, most
likely because of a reduction in light competition throughremoval of the palatable larger species.
Taken overall, then, the way that
plant species richness responds to graz-ing depends partly on grazing intensity,but also on the evolutionary history of
the plant community and thus the particular plant species traitsthat are represented, as well as the primary productivity of theecosystem in question. An increase in species richness in response
to grazing can be expected if grazers feed preferentially on com-petitively dominant species, a prediction that has received sup-port in situations as diverse as cattle grazing in Ethiopia (see above)and periwinkles ( Littorina littorea ) feeding on algae in rocky tide
pools (Lubchenco, 1978). Conversely, a reduction in species rich-ness can be expected if the preferred food plants are competitivelyinferior, as was the case for periwinkles feeding on algae onemergent substrata in Lubchenco’s study.
19.4.2 The effect of carnivores
The rocky intertidal zone also provided
the location for pioneering work byPaine (1966) on the inﬂuence of a topcarnivore on community structure.The starﬁsh Pisaster ochraceus preys on sessile ﬁlter-feeding 
barnacles and mussels, and also on browsing limpets and chitons
and a small carnivorous whelk. These species, together with asponge and four macroscopic algae, form predictable associationson rocky shores of the Paciﬁc coast of North America. Paineremoved all the starﬁsh from a typical piece of shoreline about 8 m long and 2 m deep, and continued to exclude them for several years. At irregular intervals, the density of invertebratesand the cover of benthic algae were assessed in the experimentalarea and in an adjacent control site. The latter remained unchangedduring the study. Removal of P. ochraceus , however, had dramatic
consequences. Within a few months, the barnacle Balanus glan-
dula settled successfully. Later, barnacles were crowded out by
mussels ( Mytilus californianus ), and eventually the site became dom-
inated by the latter. All but one of the species of algae disappeared,
apparently through lack of space, and the browsers tended to moveaway, partly because space was limited and partly due to lack ofsuitable food. Overall, the removal of starﬁsh led to a reductionin the number of species from 15 to eight. The main inﬂuenceof the starﬁsh Pisaster appears to be to make space available for
competitively subordinate species. It cuts a swathe free of bar-nacles and, most importantly, free of the dominant mussels thatwould otherwise outcompete other invertebrates and algae for
space. Once again, there is exploiter-mediated coexistence. Notethat this argument applies speciﬁcally to the primary space occu-piers, such as mussels, barnacles and macroalgae. In contrast, thenumber of less conspicuous species associated with living and deadmussel shells would be expected to increase in the bed thatdevelops after Pisaster removal (more than 300 species of animals
and plants occur in mussel beds; Suchanek, 1992).
••Richness (species quadrat–1)
20
051015
Year1999 1998 1997 1996(c)North facing
20
051015
Year1999 1998 1997 1996(d)Wadi20
051015
Year1999 1998 1997 1996(a)South facing
20
051015
Year1999 1998 1997 1996(b)Hilltop
Figure 19.16 Species richness (per 20 ×
20 cm quadrats) in four topographic sites 
in Israel in April: (a) south-facing slopes, (b) hilltops, (c) north-facing slopes, and (d) wadis. 
/H17033, ungrazed subplots; 7, grazed
subplots. (After Osem et al. , 2002.)
. . . and plant 
species traits
predator-mediatedcoexistence on arocky shore . . .EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 568••THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 569
Experiments similar to those of
Paine have been performed in the more
challenging environment of hydro-thermal vents at a depth of 2500 m inthe eastern tropical Paciﬁc Ocean (Micheli et al. , 2002). Coloniza-
tion of replicate recruitment substrates (10 cm basalt cubes) was
monitored for 5 months at increasing distances from the vent in three sites in the presence and absence (exclusion cages) of predators (ﬁsh and crabs). In terms of reduced prey abundance(particularly two gastropods endemic to vents – the limpetLepetodrilus elevatus and the snail Cyathermia naticoides ), the effects
of predation were strongest near the vent where productivity andthe overall abundance of invertebrates were greatest. Speciesrichness, which generally declined with distance from the vent,
was usually lower in the presence of predators (but only statistic-ally signiﬁcantly so at the Worm Hole site – Figure 19.18). Thereason for a lack of predator-mediated coexistence is unknown.
Turning now to terrestrial ecosys-
tems, in a study of nine Scandinavianislands, pigmy owls ( Glaucidium passer-
inum ) occurred on only four of the
islands, and the pattern of occurrenceof three species of passerine birds in the genus Parus showed a
striking relationship with this distribution (Table 19.1). The ﬁveislands without the predatory owl were home to only one species,the coal tit ( Parus ater ). However, in the presence of the owl, the
coal tit was always joined by two larger tit species, the willow tit
(P. montanus ) and the crested tit ( P. cristatus ). Kullberg and Ekman
(2000) argue that the smaller coal tit is superior in exploitationcompetition for food. The two larger species, however, have anadvantage via interference competition for foraging sites close tothe trunk of trees where they are safer from predators; in otherwords the larger species are less affected than the coal tit by predation from the owl. It seems that the owl may be responsiblefor predator-mediated coexistence, by reducing the competitivedominance enjoyed by coal tits in its absence.
However, an increase in species
richness with predation is by no meansuniversal in terrestrial ecosystems.Spiller and Schoener (1998) reviewed a
••25
20
15
10
5
0Ungrazed(a)
700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0
25
20
15
10
5
0Grazed(b)
700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0
Potential productivity (g m–2)Richness (species quadrat–1) Richness (species quadrat–1)
25
20
15
10
5
0(c)
700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0
Potential productivity (g m–2)Main limiting factor
Canopy resources Soil resources
Grazed
Ungrazed
Figure 19.17 Relationship between annual above-ground
productivity (measured in ungrazed subplots) and species richness
in (a) ungrazed and (b) grazed subplots. Open symbols representlow productivity subplots ( <200 g dry matter m
−2; hilltop, south-
and north-facing slopes in all years plus wadi in the dry 1999season). Closed symbols represent high productivity subplots (>200 g dry matter m
−2; wadi sites in years other than 1999). 
(c) Conceptual model of the relationship between productivity andspecies richness in grazed and ungrazed semiarid Mediterraneanrangeland. (After Osem et al. , 2002.). . . but not in
hydrothermal ventcommunities
predator-mediatedcoexistence amongpasserine birds . . .
. . . but not amongcommunities ofinsects or spiders
Distance to 
Island Area (km2) mainland (km) Pygmy owl Coal tit Willow tit Crested tit
Åland 970 50 ++ + +
Ösel 3000 15 ++ + +
Dagö 989 10 ++ + +
Karlö 200 7 ++ + +
Gotland 3140 85 +
Öland 1345 4 +
Bornholm 587 35 +
Hanö 2.2 4 +
Visingsö 30 6 +Table 19.1 Area, distance to mainland 
and occurrence of breeding pairs of 
pygmy owls and three species of tit. (After Kullberg & Ekman, 2000.)EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 569•• ••570 CHAPTER 19
number of studies involving birds preying upon grasshoppers,
rodents upon carabid beetles and lizards upon web spiders andconcluded that these predators usually reduced prey richness orhad no effect. In their own study in the Bahamas, they censusedspider populations at 2-month intervals for 4.5 years in enclosures
(three replicates) containing or lacking lizards. Species richness was dramatically increased by the exclusion of lizards (mainly Anolis sagrei ) at high and medium levels in the vegetation (Fig-
ure 19.19a). The lizards preyed preferentially upon rare speciesof spiders (Figure 19.19b), resulting in increased dominance of the already abundant Metapeira datona , a species whose relative
invulnerability to predation is probably due to its small size andhabit of living in a suspended retreat rather than in the middleof the web.
As was the case with grazers, the
manner in which prey species richness
responds to predation no doubt dependspartly on predation intensity, partly onecosystem productivity, and partly on the particular characteristicsof the prey species. Once again we have seen increases in preyspecies richness where carnivores feed preferentially on com-petitively dominant prey (starﬁsh feeding on mussels, pygmy owlsfeeding on coal tits) and a decrease where the preferred prey arecompetitively inferior (lizards feeding on spiders).
Another reason for contrasting
effects of consumers on lower trophiclevels relates to their prey-selection
behavior. They seldom simply takepotential prey species from a commun-ity in turn, bringing each to extinctionbefore turning to the next. Selection is moderated by the time orenergy spent in search for the preferred prey (see Chapter 9), andmany species take a mixed diet. However, others switch sharplyfrom one type of prey to another, taking disproportionatelymore of the most common acceptable types of prey. In theory,such behavior could lead to the coexistence of a large number ofrelatively rare species (a frequency-dependent form of exploiter-mediated coexistence). In this context, there is evidence that predation on the seeds of tropical trees is often more intense where the seeds are more dense (beneath and near the adult thatproduced them) (Connell, 1979); the herbivorous butterﬂy Battus
philenor forms search images for leaf shape when foraging for 
its two larval host plants, and concentrates on whichever happensto be the more common (Rausher, 1978); the freshwater zoo-planktivorous ﬁsh Rutilus rutilus switches from large planktonic
waterﬂeas, its preferred prey, to small sediment-dwellingwaterﬂeas when the density of the former falls below about 40 per liter (Townsend et al. , 1986); and piscivorous coral reef 
ﬁsh ( Cephalopholis boenak and Pseudochromis fuscus ) concentrate on
highly abundant cardinal ﬁsh (mainly Apogon fragilis ) when these
are present, leaving recruits of many other ﬁsh species relativelyunmolested (Webster & Almany, 2002). However, such frequency-
frequency-dependent
selection maysometimes enhance diversityNumber of taxa per blockZone(a)East Wall
25
20
15
10
5
0
P S B V
(b)Biovent
25
20
15
10
5
0
P S B V
(c)Worm Hole
25
20
15
10
5
0
P B/S V
Zone
Figure 19.18 Patterns of invertebrate species richness (worms 
in the order Vestimentifera (class Pogonophora), worms in the
class Polychaeta, gastropods, bivalves and crustaceans) perimplanted recruitment substrate after 5 months at three sites withtwo experimental treatments: (a) East Wall, (b) Biovent, and 
(c) Worm Hole. The results are presented for four zones whoseboundaries are based on water temperature and dominant benthicinvertebrates (at increasing distances from the hydrothermal vent:Vestimentiferan (V), bivalve (B), suspension-feeder (S) and periphery (P)). The two middle zones were combined at the Worm Hole site. Experimental treatments: 
4, uncaged; , caged to exclude
mobile predators – ﬁsh and crabs. (After Micheli et al. , 2002.)predator dietary
preferences maymodify the outcomeEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 570•• ••THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 571
dependent selection is not a general rule and may not be com-
mon. For one thing, some species are so highly specialized thatswitching is not an option – giant pandas are specialists on bam-boo shoots and specialization in diet is equally extreme amongstmany phytophagous insects. Moreover, in other cases a predator
may be sustained by one prey type whilst exterminating others.This has been claimed for the introduced snake Boiga irregularis ,
on the small island of Guam, midway between Japan and NewGuinea. Coincident with its arrival in the early 1950s, and its sub-sequent spread through Guam, most of the 18 native bird specieshave declined dramatically and seven are now extinct. Savidge(1987) argues that by including abundant small lizards in its diet,B. irregularis has maintained high densities whilst exterminating
the more vulnerable bird species.
19.5 Inﬂuence of parasitism on community
structure
The incidence of a parasite, like that of
other types of exploiter, may determinewhether or not a host species occurs inan area. Thus, the extinction of nearly50% of the endemic bird fauna of the Hawaiian Islands has been
attributed in part to the introduction of bird pathogens such asmalaria and bird pox (van Riper et al. , 1986); and changes in the
distribution of the North American moose ( Alces alces ) have been
associated with the parasitic nematode Pneumostrongylus tenuis
(Anderson, 1981). Probably the largest single change wrought inthe structure of communities by a parasite has been the destruc-tion of the chestnut ( Castanea dentata ) in North American forests,
where it had been a dominant tree over large areas until the introduction of the fungal pathogen Endothia parasitica , probably
from China.
Like grazers and carnivores, parasites
can cause more subtle effects too. In
many streams in Michigan, USA, larvaeof the herbivorous caddis-ﬂy Glossosoma
nigrior play a key role in the community
because their foraging maintains attached algae at very low levels,with negative consequences for most other stream herbivoresparasites may drive
vulnerable hostspecies extinct
a microparasite withsubtle direct andindirect effects in astream community
Figure 19.19 (left) (a) Spider species richness plotted against total
number of individuals (all censuses) in the presence and absence 
of lizards at three heights in the vegetation. For a given number of individuals, enclosures without lizards (
/H17033) contained a greater
number of spider species than enclosures with lizards ( 7) except
low in the vegetation. (b) Mean proportion of censuses in whicheach web spider was recorded per enclosure in the presence (
4)
and absence of lizards ( /H17039). Error bars ±SD. (After Spiller &
Schoener, 1998.)Species richness7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1 100 10Medium vegetation(a)Controls Lizards removedSpecies richness7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1 100 10High vegetationSpecies richness7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Total number of individuals1 100 10Low vegetationProportion of censuses present1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
M. datona E. cazieri
A. argentataA. elevatus L. mactansE. ravilla
G. cancriformisN. clavipesP. argyra(b)EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 571572 CHAPTER 19
(Kohler, 1992). G. nigrior is subject to sporadic outbreaks of a highly
speciﬁc microsporidian microparasite, Cougourdella , which result
in dramatic whole stream reductions in G. nigrior density that may
be maintained for years. In Seven Mile Creek, for example, the
mean G. nigrior density was 6285 per m2in the 10 generations before
a parasite outbreak in 1990 but it averaged 164 per m2for the next
decade (Figure 19.20). The decline of G. nigrior leads to increased
abundance of its food resource (Figure 19.21a). As a result, sev-eral herbivores (Figure 19.21b–d), including a species that was previously absent or extremely rare (Figure 19.21e), increased in
abundance after the streams had experienced a parasite-causeddecline in G. nigrior . Thus, by reducing the abundance of the com-
petitively dominant herbivore, the parasite increased herbivoreequitability (one aspect of species diversity) and may have beenresponsible for an increase in species richness. This example,therefore, has the hallmarks of parasite-mediated coexistenceThe parasite was also responsible for further effects – increasedalgal abundance seems to have resulted in more ﬁne particulatedead organic matter (through sloughing off of algal cells) fueling
an increase in the density of ﬁlter-feeders (Figure 19.21f ), and theincrease in abundance of vulnerable herbivore species ( G. nigrior
is relatively invulnerable to predators) led to increased densitiesof predaceous caddis-ﬂies ( Rhyacophila manistee ) and stoneﬂies
(Paragnetina media ) (Figure 19.21g).
In terrestrial ecosystems, too, 
there are apparent examples of parasite-mediated coexistence. For example, themalarial parasite Plasmodium azurophilum
infects two Anolis lizards on the
Caribbean island of St Martin. One of the lizards, thought to bethe competitive dominant, is widespread throughout the islandwhile the other is only found in a limited area. Schall (1992) reported
that the superior competitor was much more likely to be infectedby the parasite and, intriguingly, the two species only coexisted
where the parasite was present. Once again, though, this is far
from a universal pattern. For example, the invading grey squirrel(Sciurus carolensis ) is displacing the resident red squirrel ( S. vulgaris )
throughout much of its range in Britain. At least part of the reason seems to be that the invader has brought with it a para-pox virus that has little discernible effect on the grey squirrel buta dramatic adverse effect on the health of the native red squirrel(Tompkins et al. , 2003).
Brood parasites (see Section 12.2.3),
such as brown-headed cowbirds 
(Molothrus ater ), might also be expected
to affect the composition or richness of the communities in whichthey operate. De Groot and Smith (2001) made use of a cowbirdreduction program in a pine ( Pinus banksiana ) forest in Michigan
(designed to protect one of the cowbird’s hosts, the endangeredKirtland’s warbler Dendroica kirtlandii ) to investigate whether the
songbird community as a whole was affected by a reduction inthe density of the brood parasite. Their results provided no sup-
port for parasite-mediated coexistence, nor was there a changein community composition or an increase in the representationof songbird species known to be unsuitable as hosts for cowbirds.
Parasites may sometimes inﬂuence
community composition not by alteringthe outcome of competitive interac-tions but through an impact on a keymember of the community that acts asan ecosystem engineer ( sensu Jones et al.,
1994, 1997). The juvenile stages of thetrematode Curtuteria australis encyst in the foot of cockles,
Austrovenus stutchburyi , and impair the burrowing ability of the
cockles. This results in heavily infected cockles remaining
stranded at the surface of the sediments, where they are easy prey
•• ••1990G. nigrior density (no. m–2)
Cougourdella prevalence (%)10,000
1000100
80
60
40
20
0100
10
1
Year2000 1998 1996 1994 1992 1988 1986PrevalenceDensity
Figure 19.20 Glossosoma nigrior density 
in Seven Mile Creek, Michigan, and the
percentage of the population infected(prevalence) by Cougourdella . (After 
Kohler, 1992.)
parasite-mediated
coexistence inCaribbean lizards . . .. . . but not insongbirds
parasites thatinﬂuence species that are themselvesstrong communityinteractorsEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 572THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 573
for oystercatchers, the trematode’s deﬁnitive host (Thomas &
Poulin, 1998; Mouritsen, 2002). Cockles, the dominant bivalvesin New Zealand soft-sediment intertidal zones, are normallyburied 2–3 cm under the sediment surface. But in areas of intenseparasitism, large numbers protrude from the sediment or lie on
its surface, increasing surface heterogeneity and changing patternsof water ﬂow and sedimentation. Mouritsen and Poulin (2005)manipulated the density of surface cockles by creating plots with30 or 100 surface cockles added to compare with control plotswith naturally few cockles at the surface. After 6 months, therewere signiﬁcantly more species of macrofaunal invertebrates(polychaetes, molluscs, crustaceans, etc.) in the treatments withadded surface cockles and the densities of a variety of taxa weregreater in these experimental plots (Figure 19.22).19.6 Appraisal of the effects of predators 
and parasites
1Selective predators are likely to act to enhance species rich-
ness in a community if their preferred prey are competitivelydominant and in situations where community productivity is high. It seems likely that there is some general correlationbetween palatability to predators and high growth rates. If 
the production of chemical and physical defenses by preyrequires a sacriﬁce of resources used in growth and reproduction,we might expect species that are competitive dominants in theabsence of predators (and hence, which devote resources to competition rather than defense) to suffer excessively fromtheir presence. Thus, selective predators may often enhance
•• ••Paragnetina mediaRhyacophila manisteeDensity (no. m–2)350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Year1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002(g)106
105
104
103(a)Algae
10,000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0(b)Baetis
101001000(c)Neophylax
(d)Antocha
High Low10,000
1000
100
10(e)Goera
High Low500
400
300
200
100
0 10100100010,000(f)Simuliidae
High LowDensity Density
Glossosoma  density
Glossosoma collapseFigure 19.21 Mean densities of 
(a) attached algae (cells cm−2), 
(b–e) herbivorous insects (number m−2) and
(f ) ﬁlter-feeders (number m−2), in relation
to Glossosoma nigrior density (high, before 
a parasite outbreak; low, during a parasite
outbreak) in six streams. Lines connectdata points for each of the six streams; 
the points with error bars ( ±1 SE) are the
overall means. (g) Predator densities beforeand after a parasite-induced reduction of G. nigrior in Silver Creek (dashed lines
show mean densities before and after thecollapse). (After Kohler & Wiley, 1997.)EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 573574 CHAPTER 19
species richness. If the predators act in a frequency-dependent
manner their action should be even stronger. Even very gen-eralist predators may increase community diversity throughexploiter-mediated coexistence, because if prey are attacked simply in proportion to their abundance, it will be those
species that are assimilating resources and producing biomassand offspring most rapidly (the competitive dominants) thatwill be most abundant, and will therefore be most severelyset back by predation. Note, however, that predators seem justas frequently to cause a reduction in species richness, or tohave no effect.2An intermediate intensity of predation is most likely to be 
associated with high prey species richness, since too low anintensity may not prevent competitive exclusion of inferior preyspecies, whilst too high an intensity may itself drive preferredprey to extinction. (Note, however, that ‘intermediate’ is difﬁcult
to deﬁne a priori .)
3The role of predators and parasites in shaping community structure may often be least signiﬁcant in communitieswhere physical conditions are more severe, variable or unpre-dictable (Connell, 1975). In sheltered coastal sites, predationappears to be a dominant force shaping community structure
•• ••Number of species per plot
30323640
Control38
34
100
cocklesNumber of individuals
per core sample
013
230
cockles
Nemerteans
525
20CrustaceansNumber of individuals
per core sample
100
cocklesControl6090
30
cockles80Polychaetes
100
cocklesControl015
30
cockles2Gastropods15
10
85
7075
6534Figure 19.22 Manipulation of the 
density of cockles at the sediment surface,
mimicking variation in infection levels by the trematode Curtuteria australis , and
its effect on intertidal communities. Mean 
(±1 SE) species richness of macrofaunal
invertebrate species per plot and meandensity of several invertebrate taxa in three experimental treatments (0, 30 and100 cockles added to a 1 m
2plot). All
means are derived from ﬁve core samples
taken per plot, with seven plots pertreatment. (After Mouritsen & Poulin, 2005)EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 574THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 575
(Paine, 1966), but in exposed rocky tidal communities where
there is direct wave action, predators seem to be scarce andto have a negligible inﬂuence on community structure (Menge& Sutherland, 1976; Menge et al., 1986). Deep-sea hydrothermal
vents provide an exception to these generalizations, probably
because the physically severe circumstances close to the ventsalso engender very high levels of productivity.
4The effects of animals on a community often extend far beyondjust those due to the cropping of their prey. Burrowing animals (such as earthworms, rabbits and porcupines) andmound-builders (ants and termites) – and parasitized cockles– all create disturbances and act as ecosystem engineers (bymodifying the physical structure of the environment) (Wilbyet al. , 2001). Their activities provide local heterogeneities,
including sites for new colonists to become established and 
for microsuccessions to take place. Larger grazing animals introduce a mosaic of nutrient-rich patches, as a result ofdunging and urinating, in which the local balance of otherspecies is profoundly changed. Even the footprint of a cow ina wet pasture may so change the microenvironment that it isnow colonized by species that would not be present were itnot for the disturbance (Harper, 1977). The predator is justone of the many agents disturbing community equilibrium.
5Carnivores that also feed at other trophic levels (omnivores)may have particularly far-reaching consequences for the com-munity. For example, omnivorous freshwater crayﬁsh caninﬂuence the composition of plants (which they consume), her-
bivores and carnivores (which they consume or with whichthey compete), and even detritivores because their extremeomnivory includes feeding on dead plant and animal material(Usio & Townsend, 2002, 2004). Moreover, they can also actas ecosystem engineers by dislodging animals and detritus asthey move or burrow through the substrate (Statzner et al. ,
2000).19.7 Pluralism in community ecology
It would be wrong to replace one
monolithic view of community organ-ization (the overriding importance ofcompetition and niche differentiation)with another (the overriding import-
ance of forces such as predation and disturbance that make com-petition much less inﬂuential). Certainly, communities structuredby competition are not a general rule, but neither necessarily arecommunities structured by any single agency. Most communitiesare probably organized by a mixture of forces – competition, predation, disturbance and recruitment – although their relativeimportance may vary systematically, with competition and predation ﬁguring more prominently in communities whererecruitment levels are high (Menge & Sutherland, 1987) and 
in less disturbed environments (Menge & Sutherland, 1976;Townsend, 1991).
In an elegant series of experiments,
Wilbur (1987) investigated the inter-actions between competition, predationand disturbance as they inﬂuenced fourspecies of frog and toad that occur inNorth American ponds. In the absence of predators, tadpoles ofScaphiopus holbrooki were competitively dominant whilst, at the
opposite extreme, Hyla chrysoscelis had a very low competitive 
status (Figure 19.23a). The presence of predatory salamanders,Notophthalmus viridescens , did not alter the total number of 
tadpoles reaching metamorphosis, but relative abundances 
were shifted because S. holbrooki , the competitive dominant, was
selectively eaten (Figure 19.23b). Finally, Wilbur subjected his tadpole communities, in the presence and absence of predators,to water loss, to simulate a natural drying regime (disturbance).The inﬂuence of competition was to slow growth and retard the
•• ••Initial(a)
FinalBufoHylaRanaScaphiopus
Pond
persistsPond
driesNewts
absentNewts
present(b)
Figure 19.23 (a) Relative abundance of
tadpoles of each of four species introduced
at high density into ponds (initial), and the relative abundances of metamorphs at the end of the experiment (ﬁnal). 
(b) Number of metamorphs of four speciesin the absence and presence of predatorysalamanders, and in ponds which persist orwhich dry up 100 days into the experiment.(After Wilbur, 1987; Townsend, 1991a.)communities are not
necessarily structuredby a single bioticprocess
physical conditionscan moderate theeffects of predatorsand parasitesEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 575576 CHAPTER 19
timing of metamorphosis, thus increasing the risk of desiccation
in drying ponds. S. holbrooki had the shortest larval period and
made up a greater proportion of metamorphs in the dryingexperiment without predators. The presence of predators ameliorated the impact of competition, allowing surviving 
tadpoles of several species to grow rapidly enough to metamor-phosize before the ponds dried up.
The consequences of parasitism may also be moderated by phys-
ical conditions. The mud snail Hydrobia ulvae and the amphipod
Corophium volutator dominate the benthic macrofaunal commun-
ity on intertidal mudﬂats in the Danish Wadden Sea. These twospecies serve as ﬁrst and second intermediate hosts, respectively,to microphallid trematodes, with sandpipers ( Calidris spp.) as
deﬁnitive hosts. The trematode eggs are expelled in the bird’s drop-
pings and the detritus-feeding snails accidentally eat them. Theparasite larvae hatch and reproduce inside the snail, releasing intothe water on a daily basis vast numbers of swimming cercariaethat seek out an amphipod. As a consequence of a temperature-dependent release of cercariae from the snails, the parasites causeintensity-dependent mortality in the amphipod hosts, which itselfincreases rapidly with increasing temperature (Mouritsen & Jensen,1997). C. volutator normally increases rapidly during spring and
summer, commonly achieving densities exceeding 80,000 indi-
viduals per m
2in early fall (Mouritsen et al. , 1997). Because these
amphipods make permanent U-shaped burrows that stabilize thesubstrate, and because of their patchy distribution, Corophium -
dominated mudﬂats have a characteristic topography with amosaic of elevated plateaux (high-density patches) and sediment
depressions (low-density patches) (Mouritsen et al. , 1998). In this
state, the Corophium bed is very stable even during strong onshore
gales. But during the spring of 1990, ambient temperatures were unusually high and so was the prevalence of microphallidinfections in the snail population, resulting in a massive releaseof cercariae from the snails and, within 5 weeks, the completecollapse of the amphipod population (Figure 19.24a) ( Jensen &Mouritsen, 1992). As the sediment-stabilizing amphipods disap-peared, the plateaux of the former Corophium bed (which covered
about 80 ha) were subject to signiﬁcant erosion (Figure 19.24b).
The characteristic mudﬂat topography eventually vanished(Figure 19.26c, d) with dramatic consequences for many othermudﬂat macroinvertebrates, including species of nemertinea,polychaeta, gastropoda, bivalvia and crustacea.
•• ••MonthCorophium (× 103 m–2)
Aug Jun Apr0
Mar51525
May(a)
1020
Jul
Silt content (%)
Aug Jun Apr6
Mar91113
May
Month(b)
1012
Erosion (mm) 2610
48
Jul8
7
–20Silt content
Erosion
Figure 19.24 Extermination of a dense
intertidal amphipod population by
microphallid trematodes and theconsequent changes in sedimentcharacteristics and topography of the 
mudﬂat. (a) Mean density ( ±SE) of
Corophium volutator . (b) Mean silt content
(particles <63µm) and substrate erosion. 
(c) The topography of the Corophium bed
before the parasite-induced C. volutator
die-off. (d) The topography of the ﬂat a few months after the disappearance of amphipods. (After Mouritsen & Poulin, 2002and Mouritsen et al., 1998. Reproduced 
by permission of K. Mouritsen)
EIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 576THE INFLUENCE OF POPULATION INTERACTIONS 577
We began this chapter by noting
the diversity of ways in which a single
species can affect communities andecosystems. It would be wrong toﬁnish it with the impression that 
competition, predation and parasitism are the principal population
interactions that determine community organization. Facilitationis also of major signiﬁcance, though once again its signiﬁcancevaries with physical conditions. Thus, the presence of a canopyof the seaweed Ascophyllum nodosum at its upper intertidal
boundary in communities in the Gulf of Maine reduced maximumdaily rock temperatures by 5–10°C and evaporative losses by anorder of magnitude, with positive outcomes for recruitment,growth and survivorship of a range of benthic organisms (Bertness
et al. , 1999). In fact, nearly half of the recorded population 
interactions in this zone were positive (facilitation) rather than negative (competitive or predatory). On the other hand, atA. nodosum ’s lower boundary, rather than ameliorating physical
conditions (these are not so severe deeper in the intertidal zone)the seaweed canopy provided excellent conditions for herbivoresand carnivores and consumer pressure was severe.
Positive interactions among terrestrial plant species have also
been demonstrated in many communities (Wilson & Agnew, 1992;Jones et al. , 1994). Plants sometimes beneﬁt their neighbors by
reducing the likelihood of consumption by herbivores. Thus,Callaway et al. (2000) examined the role played by two compet-
itively dominant and highly unpalatable plants, the physically
defended thistle Cirsium obvalatum and the chemically defended
Veratrum lobelianum . Both have invaded grazed meadows in the
central Caucasus in the Republic of Georgia. Forty four percent(15/34) of all species in the study were rare ( <1.0% cover) in open
meadow, but occurred at signiﬁcantly higher covers under C. obvalatum and V. lobelianum (i.e. within a 60 ×60 cm plot contain-
ing one of the unpalatable species). Eight species were only found under an unpalatable species, and the communities associated withthem had 78–128% more species in ﬂower or fruit than in theopen meadow sites. It seems that tasty species may avoid beingeaten, and grow and reproduce better, if they associate with anunpalatable neighbor.
Finally, we have seen how the effects of predators and para-
sites are not restricted to their prey/hosts or even just those specieswith which they or their prey compete. Sometimes the effects extendbeyond a single, or adjacent, trophic level to spread throughoutthe food web. This was the case, for example, for starﬁsh (seeSection 19.4.2), parasitized caddis larvae (see Section 19.5) andomnivorous crayﬁsh (see Section 19.6). We turn our attention tothe complex workings of whole food webs in the next chapter.
Summary
Individual species can inﬂuence the composition of whole com-
munities in a variety of ways. In this chapter we pay particularattention to the manner in which competition, predation and para-
sitism can shape communities.
The view that interspeciﬁc competition plays a central and 
powerful role in the shaping of communities was ﬁrst fosteredby the competitive exclusion principle, with its implication of alimit to the similarity of competing species, and thus a limit to thenumber of species that can be ﬁtted into a particular communitybefore niche space is fully saturated. There is no argument aboutwhether competition sometimes affects community structure, nordoes it play an overriding role in every case. Thus, other factorsmay prevent competition from progressing to competitive exclu-sion, by depressing densities or periodically reversing competitivesuperiority. Moreover, even when competition is intense, thespecies may coexist if they have aggregated distributions, with eachspecies distributed independently of the others.
Evidence from community studies of niche differentiation for
important resources in space and time is consistent with a rolefor competition in determining community composition. How-ever, the documentation of mere differences among species isinsufﬁcient. The approach has been to build null models of actualcommunities that retain certain of the characteristics of their realcounterparts (in terms of diets, feeding morphologies or distribu-tions of coexisting species) but reassemble the components at random, excluding the consequences of competition. Comparisonsof predicted and observed patterns have sometimes supported arole for competition, but by no means in all cases.
Grazing animals sometimes increase plant species richness
(exploiter-mediated coexistence) by interrupting the process of com-
petitive exclusion, thus imposing their own order on communitycomposition. Plant coexistence is more likely to be fostered bygrazers in nutrient-rich situations, and where the preferred foodplants would otherwise be competitively superior to less preferredones.
Carnivorous animals may, likewise, increase the species rich-
ness of prey. This has been recorded for rocky shore invertebratesand woodland bird communities, but not for deep-sea vent com-munities or in terrestrial insect and spider studies. The outcomefor species richness in the face of predation again depends on anumber of factors, including the pattern of dietary preference and
the relative competitive status of the prey.
The incidence of a parasite, like that of other types of
exploiter, may determine whether or not a host species occursin an area; parasites can cause more subtle effects too, byinﬂuencing species that are themselves strong interactors orecosystem engineers in terrestrial, freshwater and marine com-munities. Parasites are sometimes responsible for exploiter-mediated coexistence.
Communities are not necessarily structured by a single 
biotic process and the role of consumers in shaping community
structure can be expected to be modiﬁed according to abiotic conditions. Biotic effects may often be least signiﬁcant in com-munities where physical conditions are more severe, variable orunpredictable.
•• ••remember that some
biotic interactions arepositive in theireffectsEIPC19  10/24/05  2:14 PM  Page 577••20.1 Introduction
In the previous chapter we began to consider how population inter-
actions can shape communities. Our focus was on interactionsbetween species occupying the same trophic level (interspeciﬁccompetition) or between members of adjacent trophic levels. Ithas already become clear, however, that the structure of commun-
ities cannot be understood solely in terms of direct interactionsbetween species. When competitors exploit living resources, theinteraction between them necessarily involves further species –those whose individuals are being consumed – while a recurrenteffect of predation is to alter the competitive status of preyspecies, leading to the persistence of species that would otherwisebe competitively excluded (consumer-mediated coexistence).
In fact, the inﬂuence of a species often ramiﬁes even further
than this. The effects of a carnivore on its herbivorous prey may
also be felt by any plant population upon which the herbivorefeeds, by other predators and parasites of the herbivore, by otherconsumers of the plant, by competitors of the herbivore and of theplant, and by the myriad of species linked even more remotelyin the food web. This chapter is about food webs. In essence, we are shifting the focus to systems usually with at least threetrophic levels and ‘many’ (at least more than two) species.
The study of food webs lies at the interface of community and
ecosystem ecology. Thus, we will focus both on the populationdynamics of interacting species in the community (species present,connections between them in the web, and interaction strengths)and on the consequences of these species interactions for eco-system processes such as productivity and nutrient ﬂux.
First, we consider the incidental effects – repercussions further
away in the food web – when one species affects the abundance
of another (Section 20.2). We examine indirect, ‘unexpected’effects in general (Section 20.2.1) and then speciﬁcally the effectsof ‘trophic cascades’ (Sections 20.2.3 and 20.2.4). This leads naturally to the question of when and where the control of foodwebs is ‘top-down’ (the abundance, biomass or diversity at lower
trophic levels depends on the effects of consumers, as in a trophiccascade) or ‘bottom-up’ (a dependence of community structureon factors acting from lower trophic levels, such as nutrient con-centration and prey availability) (Section 20.2.5). We then pay special attention to the properties and effects of ‘keystone’ species– those with particularly profound and far-reaching consequences
elsewhere in the food web (Section 20.2.6).
Second, we consider interrelationships between food web struc-
ture and stability (Sections 20.3 and 20.4). Ecologists are interested
in community stability for two reasons. The ﬁrst is practical – andpressing. The stability of a community measures its sensitivity todisturbance, and natural and agricultural communities are beingdisturbed at an ever-increasing rate. It is essential to know howcommunities react to such disturbances and how they are likely
to respond in the future. The second reason is less practical butmore fundamental. The communities we actually see are, inevit-ably, those that have persisted. Persistent communities are likelyto possess properties conferring stability. The most fundamentalquestion in community ecology is: ‘Why are communities the waythey are?’ Part of the answer is therefore likely to be: ‘Becausethey possess certain stabilizing properties’.
20.2 Indirect effects in food webs
20.2.1 ‘Unexpected’ effects
The removal of a species (experimentally, managerially or 
naturally) can be a powerful tool in unraveling the workings of a food web. If a predator species is removed, we expect anincrease in the density of its prey. If a competitor species isremoved, we expect an increase in the success of species with which
it competes. Not surprisingly, there are plenty of examples of suchexpected results.
Chapter 20
Food Webs
EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 578FOOD WEBS 579
Sometimes, however, removing a species may lead to a
decrease in competitor abundance, or the removal of a predator
may lead to a decrease in prey abundance. Such unexpected
effects arise when direct effects are less important than theeffects that occur through indirect pathways. Thus, the removal
of a species might increase the density of one competitor, whichin turn causes another competitor to decline. Or the removal ofa predator might increase the abundance of a prey species that is competitively superior to another, leading to a decrease in thedensity of the latter. In a survey of more than 100 experimentalstudies of predation, more than 90% demonstrated statisticallysigniﬁcant results, and of these about one in three showed unexpected effects (Sih et al. , 1985).
These indirect effects are brought especially into focus when
the initial removal is carried out for some managerial reason 
– either the biological control of a pest (Cory & Myers, 2000) orthe eradication of an exotic, invader species (Zavaleta et al. , 2001)– since the deliberate aim is to solve a problem, not create further,
unexpected problems.
For example, there are many islands
on which feral cats have been allowedto escape domestication and now threaten native prey, especially
birds, with extinction. The ‘obvious’ response is to eliminate the cats (and conserve their island prey), but as a simple modeldeveloped by Courchamp et al. (1999) explains, the programs may
not have the desired effect, especially where, as is often the case,rats have also been allowed to colonize the island (Figure 20.1).The rats (‘mesopredators’) typically both compete with and prey upon the birds. Hence, removal of the cats (‘superpredators’),which normally prey upon the rats as well as the birds, is likelyto increase not decrease the threat to the birds once predation
pressure on the mesopredators is removed. Thus, introduced cats on Stewart Island, New Zealand preyed upon an endangeredﬂightless parrot, the kakapo, Strigops habroptilus (Karl & Best, 1982);
••(a)
µr
ηb µb
PreyrbMesopredatorrr
Superpredatorrc
(b)
Population size →
Time →Population size →
Time →Figure 20.1 (a) Schematic representation
of a model of an interaction in which a
‘superpredator’ (such as a cat) preys both on ‘mesopredators’ (such as rats, for whichit shows a preference) at a per capita rate
µ
r, and on prey (such as birds) at a per
capita rate µb, while the mesopredator 
also attacks prey at a per capita rate ηb.
Each species also recruits to its own
population at net per capita rates rc, rr
and rb. (b) The output of the model with
realistic parameter values: with all threespecies present, the superpredator keepsthe mesopredator in check and all threespecies coexist (left); but in the absence 
of the superpredator, the mesopredatordrives the prey to extinction (right). (After Courchamp et al. , 1999.)mesopredatorsEIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 579580 CHAPTER 20
but controlling cats alone would have been risky, since their pre-
ferred prey are three species of introduced rats, which, unchecked,could pose far more of a threat to the kakapo. In fact, StewartIsland’s kakapo population was translocated to smaller offshoreislands where exotic mammalian predators (like rats) were absent
or had been eradicated.
Further indirect effects, though not really ‘unexpected’, have
occurred following the release of the weevil, Rhinocyllus conicus ,
as a biological control agent of exotic thistles, Carduus spp., in the
USA (Louda et al. , 1997). The beetle also attacks native thistles in
the genus Cirsium and reduces the abundance of a native picture-
winged ﬂy, Paracantha culta , which feeds on thistle seeds – the
weevil indirectly harms species that were never its intended target.
20.2.2 Trophic cascades
The indirect effect within a food web that has probably received
most attention is the so-called trophic cascade (Paine, 1980; Poliset al. , 2000). It occurs when a predator reduces the abundance 
of its prey, and this cascades down to the trophic level below,such that the prey’s own resources (typically plants) increase in
abundance. Of course, it need not stop there. In a food chain withfour links, a top predator may reduce the abundance of an inter-mediate predator, which may allow the abundance of a herbivoreto increase, leading to a decrease in plant abundance.
The Great Salt Lake of Utah in the USA provides a natural
experiment that illustrates a trophic cascade. There, what is essen-tially a two-level trophic system (zooplankton–phytoplankton) isaugmented by a third trophic level (a predatory insect, Trichocorixa
verticalis ) in unusually wet years when salinity is lowered
(Wurtsbaugh, 1992). Normally, the zooplankton, dominated by
a brine shrimp ( Artemia franciscana ), are capable of keeping phyto-
plankton biomass at a low level, producing high water clarity. But when salinity declined from above 100 g l
−1to 50 g l−1in 1985,
Trichochorixa invaded and Artemia biomass was reduced from 720
t o  2m gm−3, leading to a massive increase in the abundance of
phytoplankton, a 20-fold increase in chlorophyll aconcentration
and a fourfold decrease in water clarity (Figure 20.2).
Another example of a trophic cascade, but also of the complex-
ity of indirect effects, is provided by a 2-year experiment in which
bird predation pressure was manipulated in an intertidal communityon the northwest coast of the USA, in order to determine the effectsof the birds on three limpet species (prey) and their algal food(Wootton, 1992). Glaucous-winged gulls ( Larus glaucescens ) and
oystercatchers ( Haematopus bachmani ) were excluded by means of
wire cages from large areas (each 10 m
2) in which limpets were
common. Overall, limpet biomass was much lower in the pre-
sence of birds, and the effects of bird predation cascaded downto the plant trophic level, because grazing pressure on the ﬂeshyalgae was reduced. In addition, the birds freed up space for algal
colonization through the removal of barnacles (Figure 20.3).It also became evident, however, that while birds reduced the
abundance of one of the limpet species, Lottia digitalis , as might
have been expected, they increased the abundance of a secondlimpet species ( L. strigatella ) and had no effect on the third, L. pelta .
The reasons are complex and go well beyond the direct effectsof consumption of limpets. L. digitalis , a light-colored limpet, tends
to occur on light-colored goose barnacles ( Pollicipes polymerus ), 
whilst dark L. pelta occurs primarily on dark Californian mussels
(Mytilus californianus ).Both limpets show strong habitat selection
for these cryptic locations. Predation by gulls reduced the area
covered by goose barnacles (to the detriment of L. digitalis ), lead-
ing through competitive release to an increase in the area coveredby mussels (beneﬁting L. pelta ). The third species, L. strigatella , 
is competitively inferior to the others and increased in density
because of competitive release.
•• ••g l–1
0200250Salinity
100150
50Number m–3
060Trichocorixa  density
40
20mg m–3
0.11000.010,000.0Density of grazing Artemia
10.0100.0
1.0% day–1
090120Grazing rate
3060mg m–3
015Chlorophyll a
510
1973 1986–90 1985–86Secchi (m)0810Water transparency
46
2
Year20
Figure 20.2 Variation in the pelagic ecosystem of the Great 
Salt Lake during three periods that differed in salinity. 
(After Wurtsbaugh, 1992.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 580FOOD WEBS 581
20.2.3 Four trophic levels
In a four-level trophic system, if it is subject to trophic cascade,
we might expect that the abundances of the top carnivores andthe herbivores are positively correlated, as are those of the primary carnivores and the plants. This is precisely what was found in an experimental study of the food web in Eel River, 
northern California (Figure 20.4a) (Power, 1990). Large ﬁsh (roach,Hesperoleucas symmetricus , and steelhead trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss )
reduced the abundance of ﬁsh fry and invertebrate predators, allowing their prey, tuft-weaving midge larvae ( Pseudochironomus
richardsoni ) to attain high density and to exert intense grazing 
pressure on ﬁlamentous algae ( Cladophora ), whose biomass was
thus kept low.
Support for the expected pattern also comes from the tropical
lowland forests of Costa Rica and a study of Tarsobaenus beetlespreying on Pheidole ants that prey on a variety of herbivores 
that attack ant-plants, Piper cenocladum (though the detailed trophic
interactions are slightly more complex than this – Figure 20.5a).
A descriptive study at a number of sites showed precisely the alternation of abundances expected in a four-level trophic cascade:relatively high abundances of plants and ants associated with low levels of herbivory and beetle abundance at three sites, but
low abundances of plants and ants associated with high levels of
herbivory and beetle abundance at a fourth (Figure 20.5b). More-over, when beetle abundance was manipulated experimentally atone of the sites, ant and plant abundance were signiﬁcantly higher,and levels of herbivory lower, in the absence of beetles than intheir presence (Figure 20.5c).
On the other hand, in a four-level
trophic stream community in New
Zealand (brown trout ( Salmo trutta ),
•• ••
Percentage cover
048
Fleshy algal speciesPercentage cover
02575
50
Barnacles Mussels Barnacles MusselsNumber of limpets (m–2)
0200400
L. digitalis L. pelta L. strigatella L. digitalis L. pelta L. strigatellaBirds present Birds excluded
Figure 20.3 When birds are excluded
from the intertidal community, barnacles
increase in abundance at the expense ofmussels, and three limpet species showmarked changes in density, reﬂecting
changes in the availability of cryptic habitatand competitive interactions as well as theeasing of direct predation. Algal cover ismuch reduced in the absence of effects ofbirds on intertidal animals (means ±SE are
shown). (After Wootton, 1992.)
four levels can 
act like threeEIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 581582 CHAPTER 20
predatory invertebrates, grazing invertebrates and algae), the
presence of the top predator did not lead to reduced algalbiomass, because the ﬁsh inﬂuenced not only the predatoryinvertebrates but also directly affected the activity of the her-bivorous species at the next trophic level down (Figure 20.4b)
(Flecker & Townsend, 1994). They did this both by consuminggrazers and by con-straining the foraging behavior of the survivors(McIntosh & Townsend, 1994). A similar situation has beenreported for a four-level trophic terrestrial community in the
Bahamas, consisting of lizards, web spiders, herbivorous arthro-pods and seagrape shrubs ( Coccoloba uvifera ) (Figure 20.4c) (Spiller
& Schoener, 1994). The results of experimental manipulations indicated a strong interaction between top predators (lizards) and
herbivores, but a weak effect of lizards on spiders. Consequently,the net effect of top predators on plants was positive and therewas less leaf damage in the presence of lizards. These four-level
•• ••Filamentous
algae(a)
Large
fish
Fish fry
and
predatory
insects
Tuft-weaving
chironomids
Algae(b)
Brown
trout
Predatory
insects
Herbivorous
insects
Seagrape
shrubs(c)
Lizards
Web-spinning
spiders
Herbivorous
arthropodsFigure 20.4 Three examples of food
webs, each with four trophic levels. 
(a) The absence of omnivory (feeding at more than one trophic level) in thisNorth American stream community means
it functions as a four-level trophic system.On the other hand, web (b) from a NewZealand stream community and web (c) from a terrestrial Bahamaniancommunity both function as three-leveltrophic webs. This is because of the strongdirect effects of omnivorous top predatorson herbivores and their less inﬂuentialeffects on intermediate predators. (After
Power, 1990; Flecker & Townsend, 1994;Spiller & Schoener, 1994, respectively.)
Tarsobaenus
beetles(a)
Piper cenocladum
treesPheidole  ants
Herbivores
Percentage
02060(c)
2060
0
Leaf area (cm2/10)Means
1101000
Site(b)
Leaf area Herbivory Ants 4 3 2 140 40 100
Figure 20.5 (a) Schematic representation of a four-level food chain in Costa Rica. Pale arrows denote mortality and dark arrows a
contribution to the consumer’s biomass; arrow breadth denotes their relative importance. Both (b) and (c) show evidence of a tr ophic
cascade ﬂowing down from the beetles: with positive correlations between the beetles and herbivores and between the ants and tr ees. 
(b) The relative abundance of ant-plants ( /H17039), abundance of ants ( /H17039) and of beetles ( /H17039), and strength of herbivory ( 4) at four sites. Means and
standard errors are shown; the units of measurement are various and are given in the original references. (c) The results of an  experiment
at site 4 when replicate enclosures were established without beetles ( /H17039) and with beetles ( /H17039). Units are: ants, % of plant petioles occupied;
herbivory, % of leaf area eaten; leaf area, cm2per 10 leaves. (After Letourneau & Dyer, 1998a, 1998b; Pace et al. , 1999.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 582FOOD WEBS 583
trophic communities have a trophic cascade, but it functions as
if they had only three levels.
20.2.4 Cascades in all habitats? Community- or 
species-level cascades?
So much of the discussion of trophic 
cascades, including their original identi-ﬁcation, has been based on aquatic
(either marine or freshwater) examples that the question hasseriously been asked ‘are trophic cascades all wet?’ (Strong,
1992). As pointed out by Polis et al. (2000), however, in order to
answer this question we should recognize a distinction betweencommunity- and species-level cascades (Polis, 1999). In the former, the predators in a community, as a whole, control theabundance of the herbivores, such that the plants, as a whole, are released from control by the herbivores. But in a species-levelcascade, increases in a particular predator give rise to decreasesin particular herbivores and increases in particular plants, with-out this affecting the whole community. Thus, Schmitz et al. (2000),
in apparent contradiction of the ‘all cascades are wet’ proposition,
reviewed a total of 41 studies in terrestrial habitats demonstrat-ing trophic cascades; but Polis et al. (2000) pointed out that all of
these referred only to subsets of the communities of which theywere part – that is, they were essentially species-level cascades.Moreover, the measures of plant performance in these studies weretypically short term and small scale (for instance, ‘leaf damage’as in the lizard–spider–herbivore–seagrape example above) ratherthan broader scale responses of signiﬁcance to the whole com-munity, such as plant biomass or productivity.
Polis et al. (2000) proposed, then, that community-level 
cascades are most likely to occur in systems with the followingcharacteristics: (i) the habitats are relatively discrete and homo-
geneous; (ii) the prey population dynamics (including those of the primary producers) are uniformly fast relative to those of theirconsumers; (iii) the common prey tend to be uniformly edible;and (iv) the trophic levels tend to be discrete and species inter-actions strong, such that the system is dominated by discrete trophicchains.
If this proposition is correct, then community-level cascades
are most likely in pelagic communities of lakes and in benthic communities of streams and rocky shores (all ‘wet’) and perhapsin agricultural communities. These tend to be discrete, relativelysimple communities, based on fast-growing plants often dominatedby a single taxon (phytoplankton, kelp or an agricultural crop).This is not to say (as the Schmitz et al. (2000) review conﬁrms)
that such forces are absent in more diffuse, species-rich systems,but rather that patterns of consumption are so differentiated thattheir overall effects are buffered. From the point of view of thewhole community, such effects may be represented as trophic trickles rather than cascades.Certainly, the accumulating evidence seems to support a 
pattern of overt community-level cascades in simple, especially
wet, communities, and much more limited cascades embeddedwithin a broader web in more diverse, especially terrestrial, com-
munities. It remains to be seen, however, whether this reﬂectssome underlying realities or simply differences in the practicaldifﬁculties of manipulating and studying cascades in differenthabitats. An attempt to decide whether there are real differencesbetween aquatic and terrestrial food webs was forced to con-clude that there is little evidence, either empirical or theoretical,to either support or refute the idea (Chase, 2000).
20.2.5 Top-down or bottom-up control of food webs?
Why is the world green?
We have seen that trophic cascades are normally viewed ‘fromthe top’, starting at the highest trophic level. So, in a three-leveltrophic community, we think of the predators controlling the abundance of the grazers and say that the grazers are subject to‘top-down control’. Reciprocally, the predators are subject to
bottom-up control (abundance determined by their resources): a standard predator–prey interaction. In turn, the plants are alsosubject to bottom-up control, having been released from top-downcontrol by the effects of the predators on the grazers. Thus, in atrophic cascade, top-down and bottom-up control alternate as wemove from one trophic level to the next.
But suppose instead that we start at the other end of the food
chain, and assume that the plants are controlled bottom-up by com-petition for their resources. It is still possible for the herbivores
to be limited by competition for plants – their resources – and 
for the predators to be limited by competition for herbivores. Inthis scenario, all trophic levels are subject to bottom-up control(also called ‘donor control’), because the resource controls the abundance of the consumer but the consumer does not controlthe abundance of the resource. The question has therefore arisen:‘Are food webs – or are particular types of food web – dominated
by either top-down or bottom-up control?’ (Note again, though,that even when top-down control ‘dominates’, top-down and bottom-up control are expected to alternate from trophic levelto trophic level.)
Clearly, this is linked to the issues we
have just been dealing with. Top-down
control should dominate in systemswith powerful community-level trophic cascades. But in systemswhere trophic cascades, if they exist at all, are limited to the specieslevel, the community as a whole could be dominated by top-downor bottom-up control. Also, there are some communities that tend, inevitably, to be dominated by bottom-up control, becauseconsumers have little or no inﬂuence on the supply of their foodresource. The most obvious group of organisms to which thisapplies is the detritivores (see Chapter 11), but consumers of 
•• ••are trophic cascades
all wet?
top-down, bottom-upand cascadesEIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 583584 CHAPTER 20
nectar and seeds are also likely to come into this category (Odum
& Biever, 1984) and few of the multitude of rare phytophagousinsects are likely to have any impact upon the abundance of theirhost plants (Lawton, 1989).
The widespread importance of top-
down control, foreshadowing the idea of
the trophic cascade, was ﬁrst advocatedin a famous paper by Hairston et al.
(1960), which asked ‘Why is the world green?’ They answered,in effect, that the world is green because top-down control pre-dominates: green plant biomass accumulates because predatorskeep herbivores in check. The argument was later extended tosystems with fewer or more than three trophic levels (Fretwell,1977; Oksanen et al. , 1981).
Murdoch (1966), in particular, chal-
lenged these ideas. His view, described
by Pimm (1991) as ‘the world is pricklyand tastes bad’, emphasized that even if
the world is green (assuming it is), it does not necessarily followthat the herbivores are failing to capitalize on this because theyare limited, top-down, by their predators. Many plants haveevolved physical and chemical defenses that make life difﬁcult forherbivores (see Chapter 3). The herbivores may therefore be com-peting ﬁercely for a limited amount of palatable and unprotectedplant material; and their predators may, in turn, compete for scarceherbivores. A world controlled from the bottom-up may still be green.
Oksanen (1988), moreover, has argued that the world is not
always green – particularly if the observer is standing in the middle
of a desert or on the northern coast of Greenland. Oksanen’s contention (see also Oksanen et al. , 1981) is that: (i) in extremely
unproductive or ‘white’ ecosystems, grazing will be light becausethere is not enough food to support effective populations of herbivores: both the plants and the herbivores will be limited bottom-up; (ii) at the highest levels of plant productivity, in ‘green’ecosystems, there will also be light grazing because of top-downlimitation by predators (as argued by Hairston et al. , 1960); but
(iii) between these extremes, ecosystems may be ‘yellow’, whereplants are top-down limited by grazers because there are insufﬁci-ent herbivores to support effective populations of predators. Thesuggestion, then, is that productivity shifts the balance betweentop-down and bottom-up control by altering the lengths of foodchains. This still remains to be critically tested.
There are also suggestions that the
level of primary productivity may beinﬂuential in other ways in determiningwhether top-down or bottom-up control
is predominant. Chase (2003) examined the effect of nutrient concentrations on a freshwater web comprising an insect pred-ator, Belostoma ﬂumineum , feeding on two species of herbivorous
snails, Physella girina and Helisoma trivolvis , in turn feeding on macro-
phytes and algae within a larger food web including zooplanktonand phytoplankton. At the lowest nutrient concentrations, the snails
were dominated by the smaller P. gyrina , vulnerable to predation,
and the predator gave rise to a trophic cascade extending to theprimary producers. But at the highest concentrations, the snailswere dominated by the larger H. trivolvis , relatively invulnerable
to predation, and no trophic cascade was apparent (Figure 20.6).
This study, therefore, also lends support to Murdoch’s proposi-tion that the ‘world tastes bad’, in that invulnerable herbivores gaverise to a web with a relative dominance of bottom-up control.Overall, though, we see again that the elucidation of clear patternsin the predominance of top-down or bottom-up control remainsa challenge for the future.
20.2.6 Strong interactors and keystone species
Some species are more intimately and tightly woven into the 
fabric of the food web than others. A species whose removal would produce a signiﬁcant effect (extinction or a large changein density) in at least one other species may be thought of as astrong interactor. Some strong interactors would lead, through
their removal, to signiﬁcant changes spreading throughout the food web – we refer to these as keystone species .
A keystone is the wedge-shaped block at the highest point of
an arch that locks the other pieces together. Its early use in foodweb architecture referred to a top predator (the starﬁsh Pisaster
on a rocky shore; see Paine (1966) and Section 19.4.2) that has anindirect beneﬁcial effect on a suite of inferior competitors bydepressing the abundance of a superior competitor. Removal ofthe keystone predator, just like the removal of the keystone in
an arch, leads to a collapse of the structure. More precisely, it leadsto extinction or large changes in abundance of several species, pro-ducing a community with a very different species compositionand, to our eyes, an obviously different physical appearance.
It is now usually accepted that key-
stone species can occur at other trophiclevels (Hunter & Price, 1992). Use of theterm has certainly broadened since it was ﬁrst coined (Piraino et al. , 2002), leading some to question
whether it has any value at all. Others have deﬁned it more narrowly– in particular, as a species whose impact is ‘disproportionatelylarge relative to its abundance’ (Power et al. , 1996). This has the
advantage of excluding from keystone status what would other-
wise be rather trivial examples, especially ‘ecological dominants’at lower trophic levels, where one species may provide theresource on which a whole myriad of other species depend – for example, a coral, or the oak trees in an oak woodland. It is certainly more challenging and more useful to identify species with disproportionate effects.
Semantic quibbles aside, it remains important to acknowledge
that while all species no doubt inﬂuence the structure of their communities to a degree, some are far more inﬂuential than 
•• ••why is the world
green? . . .
. . . or is it pricklyand bad tasting?
an inﬂuence ofprimary productivity?what is a keystonespecies?EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 584FOOD WEBS 585
others. Indeed, various indices have been proposed to measure
this inﬂuence (Piraino et al. , 2002); for example, the ‘community
importance’ of a species is the percentage of other species lostfrom the community after its removal (Mills et al. , 1993). Also,
recognizing the concept of keystone species and attempting 
to identify them are both important from a practical point of view because keystone species are likely to have a crucial role in conservation: changes in their abundance will, by deﬁnition,have signiﬁcant repercussions for a whole range of other species.Inevitably, though, the dividing line between keystone species andthe rest is not clear cut.
In principle, keystone species can
occur throughout the food web. Joneset al. (1997) point out that it need not
even be their trophic role that makes
them important, but rather that they 
act as ‘ecological engineers’ (see Section 13.1). Beavers, forexample, in cutting down a tree and building a dam, create a habitat on which hundreds of species rely. Keystone mutualists(Mills et al. , 1993) may also exert inﬂuence out of proportion 
to their abundance: examples include a pollinating insect onwhich an ecologically dominant plant relies, or a nitrogen-ﬁxingbacterium supporting a legume and hence the whole structureof a plant community and the animals reliant on it. Certainly, keystone species are limited neither to top predators nor con-sumers mediating coexistence amongst their prey. For example,lesser snow geese ( Chen caerulescens caerulescens ) are herbivores that
breed in large colonies in coastal brackish and freshwater marshes
along the west coast of Hudson Bay in Canada. At their nestingsites in spring, before the onset of above-ground growth of vegeta-tion, adult geese grub for the roots and rhizomes of graminoid
plants in dry areas and eat the swollen bases of sedge shoots in wet areas. Their activity creates bare patches (1–5 m
2) of peat
and sediment. Since there are few pioneer plant species able to
recolonize these patches, recovery is very slow. Furthermore, in ungrubbed brackish marshes, intense grazing by high densitiesof geese later in the summer is essential in establishing and 
maintaining grazing ‘lawns’ of Carex and Puccinellia (Kerbes et al. ,
1990). It seems reasonable to consider the lesser snow goose asa keystone (herbivore) species.
20.3 Food web structure, productivity and
stability
Any ecological community can be characterized by its structure
(number of species, interaction strength within the food web, 
average length of food chains, etc.), by certain quantities (espe-
cially biomass and the rate of production of biomass, which we can summarize as ‘ productivity ’) and by its temporal stability
(Worm & Duffy, 2003). In the remainder of this chapter, we 
examine some of the interrelationships between these three.
•• ••keystone species can
occur throughout thefood web
Snail biomass (g tank–1)Low nutrients
03(a)
2
1Snail biomass (g tank–1)High nutrients
0
Low25
15
520
10
High +
predLow +
predHigh
Plant biomass (g tank–1)Low nutrients
030(b)
20
10Plant biomass (g tank–1)High nutrients
0
Low50
30
1040
20
High +
predLow +
predHigh****
Initial snail density and predator treatmentsHelisoma
PhysellaMacrophytes
AlgaeFigure 20.6 Top-down control, but only
with low productivity. (a) Snail biomass
and (b) plant biomass in experimentalponds with low or high nutrient treatments(vertical bars are standard errors). With
low nutrients, the snails were dominatedby Physella (vulnerable to predation) 
and the addition of predators led to asigniﬁcant decline (indicated by *) in snail
biomass and a consequent increase in plant biomass (dominated by algae). But with high nutrients, Helisoma snails
(less vulnerable to predation) increasedtheir relative abundance, and the addition
of predators led neither to a decline in snail biomass nor to an increase in plant biomass (often dominated bymacrophytes). (After Chase, 2003.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 585586 CHAPTER 20
Much of the very considerable recent interest in this area has 
been generated by the understandable concern to know what mightbe the consequences of the inexorable decline in biodiversity (a key aspect of structure) for the stability and productivity of biological communities.
We will be particularly concerned with the effects of food 
web structure (food web complexity in this section; food chain
length and a number of other measures in Section 20.4) on thestability of the structure itself and the stability of community pro-ductivity. It should be emphasized at the outset, however, thatprogress in our understanding of food webs depends critically onthe quality of data that are gathered from natural communities.Recently, several authors have called this into doubt, particularlyfor earlier studies, pointing out that organisms have often been
grouped into taxa extremely unevenly and sometimes at thegrossest of levels. For example, even in the same web, different taxamay have been grouped at the level of kingdom (plants), family(Diptera) and species (polar bear). Some of the most thoroughlydescribed food webs have been examined for the effects of suchan uneven resolution by progressively lumping web elements intocoarser and coarser taxa (Martinez, 1991; Hall & Raffaelli, 1993,Thompson & Townsend, 2000). The uncomfortable conclusionis that most food web properties seem to be sensitive to the levelof taxonomic resolution that is achieved. These limitations shouldbe borne in mind as we explore the evidence for food web patternsin the following sections.
First, however, it is necessary to deﬁne ‘stability’, or rather to
identify the various different types of stability.
20.3.1 What do we mean by ‘stability’?
Of the various aspects of stability, an 
initial distinction can be made betweenthe resilience of a community (or any
other system) and its resistance. Resilience describes the speed with
which a community returns to its former state after it has been
perturbed and displaced from that state. Resistance describes the
ability of the community to avoid displacement in the ﬁrst place.(Figure 20.7 provides a ﬁgurative illustration of these and otheraspects of stability.)
The second distinction is between
local stability and global stability. Local
stability describes the tendency of a
community to return to its original state
(or something close to it) when subjected to a small perturbation.
Global stability describes this tendency when the community is 
subjected to a large perturbation.
A third aspect is related to the
local/global distinction but concen-trates more on the environment of thecommunity. The stability of any com-munity depends on the environment in which it exists, as well
as on the densities and characteristics of the component species.A community that is stable only within a narrow range of envir-onmental conditions, or for only a very limited range of species’characteristics, is said to be dynamically fragile. Conversely, one that
is stable within a wide range of conditions and characteristics issaid to be dynamically robust.
Lastly, it remains for us to specify the aspect of the com-
munity on which we will focus. Ecologists have often taken a 
demographic approach. They have concentrated on the structure
of a community. However, it is also possible to focus on the stability of ecosystem processes, especially productivity .
20.3.2 Community complexity and the ‘conventional
wisdom’
The connections between food web structure and food web 
stability have preoccupied ecologists for at least half a century.Initially, the ‘conventional wisdom’ was that increased complex-ity within a community leads to increased stability; that is, morecomplex communities are better able to remain structurally the
same in the face of a disturbance such as the loss of one or morespecies. Increased complexity, then as now, was variously takento mean more species, more interactions between species, greateraverage strength of interaction, or some combination of all of thesethings. Elton (1958) brought together a variety of empirical andtheoretical observations in support of the view that more com-plex communities are more stable (simple mathematical modelsare inherently unstable, species-poor island communities are liableto invasion, etc.). Now, however, it is clear his assertions were
mostly either untrue or else liable to some other plausible inter-pretation. (Indeed, Elton himself pointed out that more extensiveanalysis was necessary.) At about the same time, MacArthur (1955)proposed a more theoretical argument in favor of the conventionalwisdom. He suggested that the more possible pathways there were by which energy passed through a community, the less likelyit was that the densities of constituent species would change inresponse to an abnormally raised or lowered density of one ofthe other species.
20.3.3 Complexity and stability in model communities:
populations
The conventional wisdom, however, has by no means always
received support, and has been undermined in particular by theanalysis of mathematical models. A watershed study was that byMay (1972). He constructed model food webs comprising a num-ber of species, and examined the way in which the population
size of each species changed in the neighborhood of its equilib-rium abundance (i.e. the local stability of individual populations ).
•• ••resilience and
resistance
local and globalstability
dynamic fragility androbustnessEIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 586FOOD WEBS 587
Each species was inﬂuenced by its interaction with all other species,
and the term βijwas used to measure the effect of species j’s 
density on species i’s rate of increase. The food webs were ‘randomly
assembled’, with all self-regulatory terms ( βii, βjj, etc.) set at −1,
but all other βvalues distributed at random, including a certainnumber of zeros. The webs could then be described by three parameters: S, the number of species; C, the ‘connectance’ of the
web (the fraction of all possible pairs of species that interacteddirectly, i.e. with β
ijnon-zero); and β, the average ‘interaction
strength’ (i.e. the average of the non-zero βvalues, disregarding
•• ••Low local stability
Low global stabilityHigh local stabilityLow global stability
Low local stability
High global stabilityHigh local stability
High global stability
Dynamically fragile
Stable
combinations
Environmental parameter 2Environmental parameter 1Low resilience
XHigh resilience
X
Low resistance High resistance
Dynamically robust
Environmental parameter 2Environmental parameter 1Figure 20.7 Various aspects of stability,
used in this chapter to describe
communities, illustrated here in aﬁgurative way. In the resilience diagrams,X marks the spot from which the
community has been displaced.EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 587588 CHAPTER 20
sign). May found that these food webs were only likely to be 
stable (i.e. the populations would return to equilibrium after asmall disturbance) if:
β(SC)
1/2<1. (20.1)
Otherwise, they tended to be unstable.
In other words, increases in the number of species, in connect-
ance and in interaction strength all tend to increase instability
(because they increase the left-hand side of the inequality above).Yet each of these represents an increase in complexity. Thus, this model (along with others) suggests that complexity leads toinstability , and it certainly indicates that there is no necessary,
unavoidable connection linking stability to complexity.
Other studies, however, have sug-
gested that this connection betweencomplexity and instability may be anartefact arising out of the particular
characteristics of the model communities or the way they have
been analyzed. In the ﬁrst place, randomly assembled food websoften contain biologically unreasonable elements (e.g. loops of the type: A eats B eats C eats A). Analyses of food webs that are constrained to be reasonable (Lawlor, 1978; Pimm, 1979) showthat whilst stability still declines with complexity, there is no sharp transition from stability to instability (compared with theinequality in Equation 20.1). Second, if systems are ‘donor con-trolled’ (i.e. β
ij>0, βji=0), stability is unaffected by or actually
increases with complexity (DeAngelis, 1975). And the relationship
between complexity and stability in models becomes more complicated if attention is focused on the resilience of thosecommunities that are stable. While the proportion of stable 
communities may decrease with increased complexity, resilience
within this subset (a crucial aspect of stability) may increase
(Pimm, 1979).
Finally, though, the relationship between species richness 
and the variability of populations appears to be affected in a very general way by the relationship between the mean ( m) and
variance ( s
2) of abundance of individual populations over time
(Tilman, 1999). This relationship can be denoted as:
s2=cmz, (20.2)
where cis a constant and zis the so-called scaling coefﬁcient. There
are grounds for expecting values of zto lie between 1 and 2
(Murdoch & Stewart-Oaten, 1989) and most observed valuesseem to do so (Cottingham et al. , 2001). In this range, population
variability increases with species richness (Figure 20.8) – a con-nection between complexity and population instability, as foundin May’s original model.
Overall, therefore, most models indicate that population 
stability tends to decrease as complexity increases. This is sufﬁcientto undermine the conventional wisdom prior to 1970. However,the conﬂicting results amongst the models at least suggest that
no single relationship will be appropriate in all communities. Itwould be wrong to replace one sweeping generalization withanother.
20.3.4 Complexity and stability in model communities:
whole communities
The effects of complexity, especially species richness, on the 
stability of aggregate properties of whole communities, such astheir biomass or productivity, seem rather more straightforward,at least from a theoretical point of view (Cottingham et al. , 2001).
Broadly, in richer communities, the dynamics of these aggregate
properties are more stable. In the ﬁrst place, as long as the ﬂuctua-
tions in different populations are not perfectly correlated, thereis an inevitable ‘statistical averaging’ effect when populations areadded together – when one goes up, another is going down – andthis tends to increase in effectiveness as richness (the number ofpopulations) increases.
This effect interacts in turn with
the variance to mean relationship ofEquation 20.2. As richness increases,
average abundance tends to decrease,and the value of zin Equation 20.2 determines how the variance
in abundance changes with this. Speciﬁcally, the greater thevalue of z, the greater the proportionate decrease in variance, 
and the greater the increase in stability with increasing richness(Figure 20.8). Only in the rare and probably unrealistic case of zbeing less than 1 (variance increases proportionately as mean 
abundance declines) is the statistical averaging effect absent.
Note that the related topic of the relationship between rich-
ness and productivity – in so far as this is different from the relationship between richness and the stability of productivity –
is picked up in the next chapter (see Section 21.7), which isdevoted to species richness.
20.3.5 Complexity and stability in practice: populations
Even if complexity and population
instability are connected in models, thisdoes not mean that we should neces-sarily expect to see the same associationin real communities. For one thing, the range and predictability of
environmental conditions will vary from place to place. In a stableand predictable environment, a community that is dynamicallyfragile may still persist. However, in a variable and unpredictableenvironment, only a community that is dynamically robust willbe able to persist. Hence, we might expect to see: (i) complex and fragile communities in stable and predictable environments, and simple and robust communities in variable and unpredictable
•• ••many models defy the
conventional wisdom
aggregate propertiesare more stable inricher communities
what should weexpect to see innature?EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 588FOOD WEBS 589
environments; but (ii) approximately the same recorded stability
(in terms of population ﬂuctuations, etc.) in all communities, since this will depend on the inherent stability of the communitycombined with the variability of the environment. Moreover, we might expect manmade perturbations to have their most pro-
found effects on the dynamically fragile, complex communities ofstable environments, which are relatively unused to perturbations,but least effect on the simple, robust communities of variable environments, which have previously been subjected to naturalperturbations.It is also worth noting that there 
is likely to be an important parallel
between the properties of a communityand the properties of its constituent populations. In stable envir-onments, populations will be subject to a relatively high degree
of Kselection (see Section 4.12); in variable environments they
will be subject to a relatively high degree of r selection. The 
K-selected populations (high competitive ability, high inherent 
survivorship but low reproductive output) will be resistant to per-
turbations, but once perturbed will have little capacity to recover
•• ••
Coefficient
of variationUnusually low z (z = 0.6)
15 50
08
10(a)
6
4
2Coefficient
of variationz = 1.0
15 50
04
10(b)
3
2
1Coefficient
of variationTypical z (z = 1.5)
15 50
02.0
10(c)
1.5
1.0
0.5Coefficient
of variationz = 2.0
15 50
02.0
10(d)
1.5
1.0
0.5Coefficient
of variationUnusually high z (z = 2.8)
15 50
08
10
Number of species(e)
6
4
2Population
CommunityFigure 20.8 The effect of species richness
(number of species) on the temporal
variability (coefﬁcient of variation, CV) ofpopulation size and aggregate communityabundance, in model communities in
which all species are equally abundant andhave the same CV, for various values ofthe scaling coefﬁcient, z, in the relationship
between the mean and variance ofabundance (Equation 20.2). (a) z=0.6, an
unusually low value. (b) z=1.0, the lower
end of typical values. (c) z=1.5, a typical
value. (d) z=2.0, the upper end of typical
values. (e) z=2.8, an unusually high value.
(After Cottingham et al. , 2001.)
connections to r
and KEIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 589590 CHAPTER 20
(low resilience). The r-selected populations, by contrast, will have
little resistance but a higher resilience. The forces acting on the
component populations will therefore reinforce the properties of their communities, namely fragility (low resilience) in stableenvironments and robustness in variable ones.
A number of studies have examined
the relationship between S, Cand βin
real communities, following the predic-
tion summarized in Equation 20.1. Theargument they use runs as follows. The
communities we observe must be stable – otherwise we wouldnot be able to observe them. If communities are only stable forβ(SC)
1/2<1 (or at least when the left-hand side of the inequality
is low), then increases in Swill lead to decreased stability unless
there are compensatory decreases in Cand/ or β. It is usually
assumed, for want of evidence, that βis constant (though ecologists
are rising to the challenge of quantifying interaction strengths –e.g. Benke et al. , 2001). Thus, communities with more species will
only retain stability if there is an associated decline in average con-nectance, C. We should therefore observe a negative correlation
between Sand C. A group of 40 food webs was gleaned from 
the literature by Briand (1983), including terrestrial, freshwaterand marine examples. For each community, a single value for connectance was calculated as the total number of identiﬁedinterspecies links as a proportion of the total possible number.Connectance is plotted against Sin Figure 20.9a. As predicted, 
connectance decreases with species number.
However, the data in Briand’s com-
pilation were not collected for the purpose of quantitative study of foodweb properties. Moreover, the level oftaxonomic resolution varied substanti-
ally from web to web. More recentstudies, in which food webs have beenmuch more rigorously documented, indicate that Cmay decrease
with S(as predicted) (Figure 20.9b), that Cmay be independent
of S(Figure 20.9c) or may even increase with S(Figure 20.9d).
Thus, no single relationship between complexity and stabilityreceives consistent support from food web analyses.
Might other hypotheses do better in accounting for the
recorded patterns in connectance? Morphological, physiological
and behavioral features restrict the number of types of prey thata consumer can exploit. If each species is adapted to feed on aﬁxed number of other species, then SCturns out to be constant
(Warren, 1994), and Cshould decrease with increasing S. But if
each species feeds on anything whose characteristics fall within
•• ••what is the 
evidence from realcommunities?connectancedecreases withspecies richness –except when itdoesn’t
(a)
0.8
25 500.6
0.40.2(b)
0.8
20 800.60.40.2
40 60
(c)
25 500.4
0.2(d)
0.3
800.2
40 1200.1
Number of species ( S)Connectance (C )
0 10
00Figure 20.9 The relationships between
connectance ( C) and species richness ( S). 
(a) For a compilation from the literature 
of 40 food webs from terrestrial, freshwater and marine environments.
(After Briand, 1983.) (b) For a compilationof 95 insect-dominated webs from varioushabitats. (After Schoenly et al. , 1991.) 
(c) For seasonal versions of a food web for a large pond in northern England,varying in species richness from 12 to 32.(After Warren, 1989.) (d) For food websfrom swamps and streams in Costa Ricaand Venezuela. (After Winemiller, 1990.) 
((a–d) after Hall & Raffaelli, 1993.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 590FOOD WEBS 591
the range to which it is adapted, then as richness increases, so
too will the likely number within the acceptable range. In thismore realistic case, connectance would be roughly constant.Moreover, if webs are made up of specialists, overall con-nectance will be low, whereas webs composed of generalists 
will have high connectance. The proportion of specialists maychange with richness. Thus, the inconsistency of pattern may simply reﬂect a diversity of forces acting on different webs.
The prediction that populations in richer communities are less
stable when disturbed can also be investigated experimentally. Oneclassic study, for example, monitored the resistance in two grass-land communities (McNaughton, 1978). In the ﬁrst, plant nutri-ents were added to the soil of a community in New York State;in the second, the action of grazing animals was manipulated in
the Serengeti. In both cases, the treatment was applied tospecies-rich and species-poor plant communities, and in both, dis-turbance reduced the diversity of the former but not the latter(Table 20.1). This was consistent with the prediction, but the effects,while signiﬁcant, were relatively slight.
Similarly, Tilman (1996) pooled data for 39 common plant
species from 207 grassland plots in Cedar Creek Natural HistoryArea, Minnesota, over an 11-year period. He found that variationin the biomass of individual species increased signiﬁcantly, but onlyvery weakly, with the richness of the plots (Figure 20.10a).
Finally, there have been a number of studies directed at the
question of whether the level of ‘perceived stability’ of naturalpopulations (interannual variation in abundance) varies with the
richness or complexity of the community. Leigh (1975) for her-bivorous vertebrates, Bigger (1976) for crop pests and Wolda (1978)for insects, all failed to ﬁnd evidence that it did so.Overall, therefore, like the theoret-
ical studies, empirical studies hint at
decreased population stability (increased variability) in morecomplex communities, but the effect seems to be weak andinconsistent.
20.3.6 Complexity and stability in practice: whole
communities
Turning to the aggregate, whole community level, evidence islargely consistent in supporting the prediction that increasedrichness in a community increases stability (decreases variability),though a number of studies have failed to detect any consistentrelationship (Cottingham et al. , 2001; Worm & Duffy, 2003).
First, returning to McNaughton’s
(1978) studies of US and Serengeti grass-
lands, the effects of perturbations werequite different when viewed in ecosys-tem (as opposed to population) terms.The addition of fertilizer signiﬁcantlyincreased primary productivity in the species-poor ﬁeld in NewYork State ( +53%), but only slightly and insigniﬁcantly changed
productivity in the species-rich ﬁeld ( +16%); and grazing in the
Serengeti signiﬁcantly reduced the standing crop biomass in 
the species-poor grassland ( −69%), but only slightly reduced that
of the species-rich ﬁeld ( −11%). Similarly, in Tilman’s (1996)
Minnesota grasslands, in contrast to the weak negative effect foundat the population level, there was a strong positive effect of rich-ness on the stability of community biomass (Figure 20.10b).
•• ••no consistent answers
data support the
models: aggregatesare more stable inricher communitiesExperimental Statistical
Control plots plots signiﬁcance
Nutrient addition
Species richness per 0.5 m2plot
Species-poor plot 20.8 22.5 NSSpecies-rich plot 31.0 30.8 NS
Equitability
Species-poor plot 0.660 0.615 NSSpecies-rich plot 0.793 0.740 P<0.05
Diversity
Species-poor plot 2.001 1.915 NSSpecies-rich plot 2.722 2.532 P<0.05
GrazingSpecies diversity
Species-poor plot 1.069 1.357 NSSpecies-rich plot 1.783 1.302 P<0.005
NS, not signiﬁcant.Table 20.1 The inﬂuence of nutrient
addition on species richness, equitability
(H/ln S) and diversity (Shannon’s index, H)
in two ﬁelds; and grazing by Africanbuffalo on species diversity in two areas of
vegetation. (After McNaughton, 1977.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 591592 CHAPTER 20
McGrady-Steed et al. (1997) manipulated richness in aquatic
microbial communities (producers, herbivores, bacterivores and
predators) and found that variation in another ecosystem measure,carbon dioxide ﬂux (a measure of community respiration) alsodeclined with richness (Figure 20.11). On the other hand, in an
experimental study of small grassland communities perturbed by an induced drought, Wardle et al. (2000) found detailed com-
munity composition to be a far better predictor of stability thanoverall richness.Studies of the response of a community to a perturbation 
(e.g. McNaughton, 1978) or of variations in the community 
in response to year-to-year variations in the environment (e.g.Tilman, 1996), are focused largely on the resistance of com-munities to change. A quite different perspective examines theresilience of communities to perturbations in ecosystem charac-
teristics such as the energy or nutrient levels contained within them. O’Neill (1976), for example, considered the community asa three-compartment system consisting of active plant tissue ( P),
heterotrophic organisms ( H) and inactive dead organic matter ( D).
The rate of change in the standing crop in these compartmentsdepends on transfers of energy between them (Figure 20.12a).Inserting real data from six communities representing tundra, tropical forest, temperate deciduous forest, a salt marsh, a fresh-water spring and a pond, O’Neill subjected the models of these
communities to a standard perturbation: a 10% decrease in the
initial standing crop of active plant tissue. He then monitored the rates of recovery towards equilibrium, and plotted these as a function of the energy input per unit standing crop of living tissue (Figure 20.12b).
The pond system, with a relatively
low standing crop and a high rate ofbiomass turnover, was the most resili-
ent. Most of its plant populations haveshort lives and rapid rates of populationincrease. The salt marsh and forests had intermediate values, whilsttundra had the lowest resilience. There is a clear relationship
•• ••Coefficient of variation for species biomass(b)
20050
4 26 8 1 0 1 23040607080Field A r=–0.39 **
20
050
4 26 8 1 0 1 23040607080Field B r=–0.32 *
10
090
Average species richness2050
426 8 1 0 1 23040607080Field C r=–0.09(NS) *
14 1610 20
050
426 8 1 0 2 23040607080Field D r=–0.53 ***90
1214161820Species richness(a)Coefficient of variation for
species biomass
0050
51 0 1 5 2 0100150200250
r=0.15 **
N=729
Figure 20.10 (a) The coefﬁcient of variation of population
biomass for 39 plant species from plots in four ﬁelds in Minnesota
over 11 years (1984–94) plotted against species richness in the plots.Variation increased with richness but the slope was very shallow.(b) The coefﬁcient of variation for community biomass in each
plot plotted against species richness for each of the four ﬁelds.Variation consistently decreased with richness. In both cases,regression lines and correlation coefﬁcients are shown. *, P<0.05;
**, P<0.01; ***, P<0.001. (After Tilman, 1996.)1200
01 5
Realized species richnessStandard deviation of CO2 flux (µl 18 h–1)
1000
800
600
400
200
0
51 0 2 0r2 = 0.74
Figure 20.11 Variation (i.e. ‘instability’) in productivity 
(standard deviation of carbon dioxide ﬂux) declined with species
richness in microbial communities observed over a 6-week period.Richness is described as ‘realized’ because it refers to the numberof species present at the time of the observation, irrespective of
the number of species with which the community was initiated.(After McGrady-Steed et al. , 1997.)
importance of the
nature – not just the richness – of the communityEIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 592FOOD WEBS 593
between resilience and energy input per unit standing crop. This
seems to depend in part on the relative importance of hetero-trophs in the system. The most resilient system, the pond, had abiomass of heterotrophs 5.4 times that of autotrophs (reﬂectingthe short life and rapid turnover of phytoplankton, the dominant
plants in this system), whilst the least resilient tundra had a hetero-troph : autotroph ratio of only 0.004. Thus, the ﬂux of energythrough the system has an important inﬂuence on resilience. The higher this ﬂux, the more quickly will the effects of a per-turbation be ‘ﬂushed’ from the system. An exactly analogous conclusion has been reached by DeAngelis (1980), but for nutrientcycling rather than energy ﬂow. Here too, then, stability seems
more inﬂuenced by the nature of the species in the communitythan by simple measures such as overall richness.
20.3.7 The number of species or their identity? 
Keystones again
Indeed, it is clear that the whole concept of a keystone species
(see Section 20.2.6) is itself a recognition of the fact that the effectsof a disturbance on structure or function are likely to depend very much on the precise nature of the disturbance – that is, onwhich species are lost. Reinforcement of this idea is provided by
a simulation study carried out by Dunne et al. (2002), in which
they took 16 published food webs and subjected them to the
sequential removal of species according to one of four criteria:(i) removing the most connected species ﬁrst; (ii) randomlyremoving species; (iii) removing the most connected species ﬁrst excluding basal species (those having predators but no prey);and (iv) removing the least connected species ﬁrst. The stabilityof the webs was then judged by the number of secondary extinc-tions that resulted from the simulated removals, such extinctions
occurring when species were left with no prey (and so basal specieswere subject to primary but not secondary extinction). In the ﬁrst place, the robustness of community composition in the faceof species loss increased with connectance of the communities – further support for an increase in community stability with complexity. Overall, however, it is also clear that secondary extinc-tions followed most rapidly when the most connected species were removed, and least rapidly when the least connected specieswere removed, with random removals lying between the two(Figure 20.13). There were, moreover, some interesting exceptionswhen, for example, the removal of a least connected species ledto a rapid cascade of secondary extinctions because it was a basalspecies with a single predator, which was itself preyed upon by
a wide variety of species. This, ﬁnally in this section, reminds us that the idiosyncrasies of individual webs are likely always toundermine the generality of any ‘rules’ even if such rules can beagreed on.
20.4 Empirical patterns in food webs: 
the number of trophic levels
In the previous section, we examined very general aspects of 
food web structure – richness, complexity – and related them tothe stability of food webs. In this section, we examine some morespeciﬁc aspects of structure and ask, ﬁrst, if there are detectablerepeated patterns in nature, and second whether we can account
for them. We deal ﬁrst, at greatest length, with the number of trophic levels, and then turn to omnivory and the extent towhich food webs are compartmentalized.
•• ••(a)
Active
plant
tissueP
Respiration TransportHeterotrophsH Inactive
organic
matterDNet primary
production
Litterfall and
translocationConsumption
Defecation
Decomposition
10–2
Energy input per unit of
standing crop (energy units)Rate of recovery after
perturbation (arbitrary units)(b)
10–1100101102TundraTropical
forestTemperate
deciduousforestFreshwaterspring
Salt marshPond
Figure 20.12 (a) A simple model of a community. The 
three boxes represent components of the system and arrows 
represent transfers of energy between the system components. (b) The rate of recovery (index of resilience) after perturbation (as a function of energy input per unit standing crop) for 
models of six contrasting communities. The pond community was most resilient to perturbation, tundra least so. (After O’Neill, 1976.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 593594 CHAPTER 20
A fundamental feature of any food
web is the number of trophic links in
the pathways that run from basal species to top predators.
Variations in the number of links have usually been investigatedby examining food chains , deﬁned as sequences of species runningfrom a basal species to a species that feeds on it, to another speciesthat feeds on the second, and so on up to a top predator (fed onby no other species). This does not imply a belief that commun-ities are organized as linear chains (as opposed to more diffusewebs); rather, individual chains are identiﬁed purely as a means
•• ••00.40.8
0.6
0.2Grassland
(S = 61, C = 0.03)Scotch Broom
(S = 85, C = 0.03)Ythan 1
(S = 124, C = 0.04)Ythan 2
(S = 83, C = 0.06)
00.40.8
0.6
0.2El Verde
(S = 155, C = 0.06)Canton
(S = 102, C = 0.07)Stony
(S = 109, C = 0.07)Chesapeake
(S = 31, C = 0.07)
00.40.8
0.6
0.2St Marks
(S = 48, C = 0.10)St Martin
(S = 42, C = 0.12)Little Rock
(S = 92, C = 0.12)Lake Tahoe
(S = 172, C = 0.13)
00.40.8
0.6
0.2Mirror
(S = 172, C = 1.15)
0.8 0.4 0 0.6 0.2Bridge Brook
(S = 25, C = 0.17)
0.8 0.4 0 0.6 0.2Chachella
(S = 29, C = 0.31)
0.8 0.4 0 0.6 0.2Skipwith
(S = 25, C = 0.32)
0.8 0.4 0 0.6 0.2
Species removed / S
Least connected Random Most connected, no basal deletions Most connectedCumulative secondary extinctions / S
Figure 20.13 The effect of sequential species removal on the number of consequential (‘secondary’) species extinctions, as a proportion 
of the total number of species originally in the web, S, for each of 16 previously described food webs. The four different rules for species
removal are described in the key. Robustness of the webs (the tendency notto suffer secondary extinctions) increased with the connectance
of the webs, C(regression coefﬁcients for the four rules: −0.62 (NS), 1.16 ( P<0.001), 1.01 ( P<0.001) and 0.47 ( P<0.005)). Overall, though,
robustness was lowest when the most connected species were removed ﬁrst and highest when the least connected were removed ﬁrst.  
The origins of the webs are described in Dunne et al. (2002). (After Dunne et al. , 2002.)
food chain lengthEIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 594FOOD WEBS 595
of trying to quantify the number of links. Food chain length has
been deﬁned in various ways (Post, 2002), and in particular hassometimes been used to describe the number of species in thechain, and sometimes (as here) the number of links. For instance,starting with basal species 1 in Figure 20.14, we can trace four
possible trophic pathways via species 4 to a top predator: 1–4–11–12, 1–4–11–13, 1–4–12 and 1–4–13. This provides four foodchain lengths: 3, 3, 2 and 2. Figure 20.14 lists a total of 21 furtherchains, starting from basal species 1, 2 and 3. The average of allthe possible food chain lengths is 2.32. Adding one to this givesus the number of trophic levels that can be assigned to the foodweb. Almost all communities described have consisted of betweentwo and ﬁve trophic levels, and most of these have had three orfour. What sets the limit on food chain length? And how can 
we account for variations in length?
In addressing these questions, we
will conform to a bias that has per-vaded investigations of food chainlength – a bias in favor of predators and
against parasites. Thus, when a food chain is described as havingfour trophic levels, these would typically be a plant, a herbivore,a predator that eats the herbivore, and a top predator that eats
the intermediate predator. Assume the top predator is an eagle.Even without collecting the data, it is all but certain that the eagleis attacked by parasites (perhaps ﬂeas), which are themselvesattacked by pathogens. But the convention is to describe the chainas having four trophic levels. Indeed, descriptions of food webs
generally have paid little attention to parasites. There is little doubtthat this neglect will have to be rectiﬁed (Thompson et al. , 2005).
20.4.1 Productivity? Productive space? Or just space?
It has long been argued that energetic considerations set a limit
to the number of trophic levels that an environment can sup-port. Of the radiant energy that reaches the earth, only a smallfraction is ﬁxed by photosynthesis and made available as eitherlive food for herbivores or dead food for detritivores. Indeed, 
the amount of energy available for consumption is considerablyless than that ﬁxed by the plants, because of work done by theplants (in growth and maintenance) and because of losses due toinefﬁciencies in all energy-conversion processes (see Chapter 17).Thereafter, each feeding link amongst heterotrophs is character-ized by the same phenomenon: at most 50%, sometimes as littleas 1%, and typically around 10% of energy consumed at one trophiclevel is available as food to the next. The observed pattern of justthree or four trophic levels could arise, therefore, simply because
a viable population of predators at a further trophic level couldnot be supported by the available energy.
The most obvious testable predic-
tions stemming from this hypothesisare, ﬁrst, systems with greater primaryproductivity (e.g. at lower latitudes)should be able to support a larger num-ber of trophic levels; and second, systemswhere energy is transferred more efﬁciently (e.g. based on insectsrather than vertebrates) should also have more trophic levels. How-ever, these predictions have received little support from naturalsystems. For instance, an analysis of 32 published food webs inhabitats ranging from desert and woodland to Arctic lakes and
tropical seas found no difference in the length of food chains when 22 webs from low-productivity habitats (less than 100 g of carbon m
−2year−l) were compared with 10 webs from high-
productivity habitats (greater than 1000 g m−2year−1). The median 
food chain length was 2.0 in both cases (Briand & Cohen, 1987).
Moreover, a survey of 95 insect-dominated webs revealed ﬁrst that food chains in tropical webs were no longer than those from(presumably) less productive temperate and desert situations,
but also that these food chains composed of insects were no longerthan those involving vertebrates (Schoenly et al. , 1991).
On the other hand, a number of studies on a much smaller
scale (e.g. in a group of streams; Townsend et al. , 1998) or where
resource availability has been manipulated experimentally, have
•• ••parasites are usually
ignoredgreater primaryproductivity supportsmore trophic levels? . . .12
11
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
3 213
1
1
111111
1
14
444555
5611
111213111112
131212
13
12
133
333333778899
101213121312131322222222
24
444555
5611
111213111112
131212
13
12
13Maximal food chains
Figure 20.14 Community matrix for an exposed intertidal rocky
shore in Washington State, USA. The pathways of all possible
maximal food chains are listed. 1, detritus; 2, plankton; 3, benthicalgae; 4, acorn barnacles; 5, Mytilus edulis ; 6, Pollicipes ; 7, chitons; 
8, limpets; 9, Tegula ; 10, Littorina ; 11, Thais ; 12, Pisaster ; 
13, Leptasterias . (After Briand, 1983.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 595•• ••596 CHAPTER 20
shown food chain length to decrease with decreased product-
ivity, especially when the decreases take productivity belowaround 10 g carbon m
−2year−l(Post, 2002). For example, in an 
experiment using water-ﬁlled containers as analogs of natural tree-holes, a 10-fold or 100-fold reduction from a ‘natural’ levelof energy input (leaf litter) reduced maximal food chain lengthby one link, because in this simple community of mosquitoes,
midges, beetles and mites, the principal predator – a chironomidmidge Anatopynia pennipes – was usually absent from the less 
productive habitats ( Jenkins et al. , 1992). This suggests that 
the simple productivity argument may indeed apply in the least productive environments (the most unproductive deserts, the deepest reaches of caves). However, establishing this is likely toprove difﬁcult, since there are other reasons for expecting top predators to be absent from such environments (their size, their isolation, etc.; Post, 2002).
In fact, though, the simple product-
ivity argument may have been mis-
guided in the ﬁrst place: what mattersin an ecological community is not theenergy available per unit area but the
total available energy, that is, productivity per unit area multi-
plied by the space (or volume) occupied by the ecosystem – the‘productive space’ hypothesis (Schoener, 1989). A very small andisolated habitat, for example, no matter how productive locally,is unlikely to provide enough energy for viable populations at higher trophic levels. A number of studies appear to support the productive space hypothesis, in that the number of trophiclevels is positively correlated with the total available energy – 
an example is shown in Figure 20.15a. On the other hand, therare attempts that have been made to determine the separate contributions of ecosystem size and local productivity havedetected an effect from size but not from productivity (e.g.Figure 20.15b).Results like these may indicate that total energy is indeed 
important but is far more dependent on ecosystem size than 
productivity per unit area. But they may mean, alternatively, thatecosystem size affects food chain length by some other means and available energy has no detectable effect (Post, 2002). Onepossibility is that ecosystem size affects species richness (it certainly does so – see Chapter 21) and richer webs tend to 
support longer chains. Unsurprisingly, richness and chain length
tend to be associated. Untangling causation from correlation isan important challenge.
High productivity
Moderate productivityLow productivity5.5
5.0
4.0
3.5
105
Ecosystem size (volume, m3)(b)
Maximum trophic position4.5
10710910111013
Large lakes
Medium lakes
Small lakes5.55.0
4.0
3.5
100
Productivity (TP, µg l–1)Maximum trophic position4.5
1011021034.5
4
32
1.5
0 5 10 12.5
Productive space In (kg C day–1)(a)
Food chain length
15 2.5 7.52.53.5
Figure 20.15 (right ) (a) The food chain length (FCL) increases
with productive space for the food webs of 14 lakes in Ontario 
and Quebec; productive space (PS) =productivity ×lake area; 
FCL =2.94PS0.21, r2=0.48. (After Vander Zanden et al. , 1999.) 
(b) Relationships between maximum trophic position andecosystem size (above) or productivity (below) for 25 lakes innortheastern North America. The maximum trophic positionincreased with ecosystem size apparently independently of
whether productivity was low (2–11 µgl
−1total phosphorus (TP)),
moderate (11–30 µgl−1TP) or high (30–250 µgl−1TP). However,
when small (3 ×105to 3×107m3), medium (3 ×107to 3×109m3)
and large lakes (3 ×109to 3×1012m3) were examined separately,
the maximum trophic position did not vary with productivity. 
The maximum trophic position is the trophic position (FCL +1) 
of the species with the highest average trophic position in each ofthe lake food webs. (After Post et al. , 2000.). . . or should it 
be total available
energy?EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 596••FOOD WEBS 597
If available energy is found ultimately to have no effect on 
food chain length, it should perhaps be borne in mind that species
richness is usually signiﬁcantly higher in productive regions (seeChapter 21), and that each consumer probably feeds on only alimited range of species at a lower trophic level. Hence, the
amount of energy ﬂowing up a single food chain in a productiveregion (a large amount of energy, but divided amongst many sub-systems) may not be very different from that ﬂowing up a singlefood chain in an unproductive region (having been dividedamongst fewer subsystems).
20.4.2 Dynamic fragility of model food webs
Another popular idea has been that the length of food chains is
limited by the lowered stability (especially resilience) of longerchains. In turn, we might then expect food chains to be shorterin environments subject to greater disturbance, where only themost stable food chains could persist. In particular, when Pimm
and Lawton (1977) examined variously structured four-speciesLotka–Volterra models (Figure 20.16a), webs with more trophiclevels had return times after a perturbation that were substantiallylonger than those with fewer levels. Because less resilient sys-tems are unlikely to persist in an inconstant environment, it wasargued that only systems with few trophic levels will commonlybe found in nature. However, these models had self-limitation(effectively, intraspeciﬁc competition) only at the lowest trophiclevel, and food chain length and the proportion of self-limited
species was therefore confounded (Figure 20.16a). When a widerrange of food webs was examined with self-limitation distributedmore systematically (Figure 20.16b–e) (Sterner et al. , 1997a), there
was a weak but signiﬁcant increase in stability in longer food 
chains when the number of species and the number of self-limitedspecies were held constant. Overall, there is no convincing case fordynamic fragility affecting the length of food chains signiﬁcantly.
20.4.3 Constraints on predator design and behavior
There may also be evolutionary constraints on the anatomy 
or behavior of predators that limit the lengths of food chains. Tofeed on prey at a given trophic level, a predator has to be largeenough, maneuverable enough and ﬁerce enough to effect a capture. In general, predators are larger than their prey (not true,
though, of grazing insects and parasites), and body size tends to increase (and density to decrease) at successive trophic levels(Cohen et al. , 2003). There may well be a limit above which 
design constraints rule out another link in the food chain. It may be impossible to design a predator that is both fast enoughto catch an eagle and big and ﬁerce enough to kill it.
Also, consider the arrival in a community of a new carnivore
species. Would it do best to feed on the herbivores or the carnivores already there? The herbivores are more abundant and less well protected. The advantage to feeding low down inthe food chain can readily be seen. Of course, if all species didthis, competition would intensify, and feeding higher in the foodchain could reduce competition. But it is difﬁcult to imagine 
a top predator sticking religiously to a rule that it should preyonly on the trophic level immediately below it, especially as theprey there are likely to be larger, ﬁercer and rarer than speciesat lower levels. Overall, theoretical explorations (Hastings &Conrad, 1979) suggest that an evolutionarily stable food chain length (one that would be optimal for predator ﬁtness) would bearound two (three trophic levels). Such arguments, however, haverather little to offer by way of explanation for the variations in
food chain length.
Thus, there are complete answers to neither of our original
questions (see p. 595). The constraints on predators are likely toset some general upper limit on the lengths of many food chains.Food chains are likely to be atypically short in especially unpro-ductive environments. Food chain length seems to increase withincreases in productive space, but it is unclear whether this is anassociation with the total energy available in an ecosystem or with
••12 3 4 5 6(a)
(c)
(d)(b)
(e)
Figure 20.16 Sets of model food webs, the dynamics of which
were examined to determine the effect of food chain length on
stability having accounted for variations in the number of speciesand the number with self-limitation (
/H17033). (a) The original set
examined by Pimm and Lawton (1997). (b) Six-species, four-levelwebs with varying degrees of self-limitation. (c) Six-species webs of self-limited species with varying numbers of trophic levels andspecies concentrated in the basal level. (d) Eight-species webs of
self-limited species with varying numbers of trophic levels andspecies dispersed among the levels. (e) Eight-species webs of self-limited species with varying numbers of trophic levels and speciesconcentrated in the basal level. (After Sterner et al. , 1997a.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 597598 CHAPTER 20
ecosystem size alone – and if the latter, it is unclear precisely how
size comes to determine food chain length. The two longest estab-lished hypotheses – energy per unit area and dynamic fragility – have, if anything, the least support.
Finally, it is important to note that,
as with connectance, estimates of food
chain length are sensitive to the degreeof taxonomic resolution. This may be
why many of the more recently documented webs have longerthan average chain lengths ranging from ﬁve to seven (Hall & Raffaelli, 1993). Moreover, if a well-resolved large web is progressively simpliﬁed by lumping taxa together (in a manner analogous to earlier studies), the estimate of food chain lengthdeclines (Martinez, 1993). There is clearly a need for rigorous 
studies of many more food webs before acceptable generaliza-tions can be reached.
20.4.4 Omnivory
Technically, an omnivore is an animal that takes prey from more
than one trophic level. Compilations of early descriptions of foodwebs indicated that omnivores are usually uncommon; this wastaken to support expectations from simple model communities,where omnivory is destabilizing (Pimm, 1982). It was argued that
in cases of omnivory, intermediate species both compete with andare preyed upon by top species and in consequence are unlikelyto persist long. A more complex and realistic model incorporated‘life history omnivory’, in which different life history stages of a species feed on different trophic levels, as when tadpoles areherbivores and adult frogs and toads are carnivores (Pimm & Rice,1987). Life history omnivory also reduces stability, but much lessthan single life stage omnivory does. Intriguingly, omnivory is notdestabilizing in donor-control models, and omnivores are common
in decomposer food webs (Walter, 1987; Usio & Townsend, 2001;Woodward & Hildrew, 2002), to which donor-control dynamicscan be applied.
In fact, an increasing number of studies indicate that omnivory
is not uncommon at all, and that earlier indications of its raritywere an artefact of the webs being only poorly described (Polis& Strong, 1996; Winemiller, 1996). For example, Sprules andBowerman (1988) found omnivory to be common in plankton food webs in North American glacial lakes, having identiﬁed alltheir zooplankton to species level and produced webs that weremuch more reliable as a result (Figure 20.17). Polis (1991) foundsimilar results in his detailed study of a desert sand community.What is more, later modeling studies have undermined the whole
suggestion that omnivory is inherently destabilizing. Dunne et al. ’s (2002) simulation study detected no relationship between
the level of omnivory and the stability of webs to species removal,while other models indicate that omnivory may in fact stabilizefood webs (McCann & Hastings, 1997). It is sobering to note thattheoretical and empirical studies have managed to march in 
step twice in quick succession, but to quite different tunes. Itreminds us that both sorts of study can only ever be as good as
the assumptions on which they are inevitably based.
20.4.5 Compartmentalization
A food web is compartmentalized if it is organized into sub-
units within which interactions are strong, but between whichinteractions are weak. (The most perfectly compartmentalized community possesses only linear food chains.) Do food webs tend to be compartmentalized?
Not surprisingly, in studies where habitat divisions are major
and unequivocal, there is a clear tendency for compartments to
map onto habitats. For instance, Figure 20.18 shows the resultsof a classic study describing the major interactions within andbetween three interconnected habitats on Bear Island in theArctic Ocean (Summerhayes & Elton, 1923). There is a signiﬁc-antly smaller number of interactions between habitats thanwould be expected by chance (Pimm & Lawton, 1980).
On the other hand, when habitat divisions are subtler, the 
evidence for compartments is typically poor, and there are even
greater difﬁculties in providing a clear demonstration of com-partments (or the lack of them) within habitats. Early analyses,
certainly, suggested that food webs within habitats are only ascompartmentalized as would be expected by chance alone (Pimm& Lawton, 1980; Pimm, 1982). More recently, though, promisingmethodological advances have been made that seem capable ofidentifying compartments within larger webs, especially when the
•• ••are the data simply
not good enough?
Percentage of webs
040
02030
24 81 2
Average degree of omnivory10
10 6Briand webs
Glacial lakes
Figure 20.17 The prevalence of omnivory in glacial lakes in
northeast North America (Sprules & Bowerman, 1988) is much
greater than that observed in Briand’s set of food webs (see Figure 20.9a). The degree of omnivory in a web is quantiﬁed asthe number of closed omnivorous links divided by the number of
top predators. A closed omnivorous link exists when a feedingpath can be traced to a prey more than one trophic level away,and from that prey back to the predator through at least one other prey occupying an intermediate trophic level.EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 598FOOD WEBS 599
taxonomic resolution within the web is high and the strengths of
interactions between the species can be weighted (Krause et al. ,
2002). Interestingly, the methods lean heavily on ideas from sociology, where the aim is to identify social cliques within abroader society. An example is shown in Figure 20.19. Also, an
alternative perspective has been to emphasize that what have been described as distinct food webs in different habitats may often be linked by ‘spatial subsidies’ – crucial ﬂows of energy andmaterials (Polis et al. , 1997) – as, for example, when lake ﬁsh that
normally prey upon other ﬁsh in the pelagic (open water) foodweb, switch to quite different prey in the benthic food web whentheir preferred prey are scarce (Schindler & Scheuerell, 2002). That is, what might seem to be separate webs are in fact com-partments within a larger web.
Since no clear consensus has emerged that food webs are more
compartmentalized than would be expected by chance alone, it
would be inappropriate to argue that compartmentalization hasbeen ‘favored’ because compartmentalized webs persist. None the less, since the earliest theoretical studies (e.g. May, 1972), aconsensus hasemerged that communities will have increased 
stability if they are compartmentalized, and it is easy to see why this might be so. In the ﬁrst place, a disturbance to a com-partmentalized web tends to be contained within the disturbed compartment, limiting the overall extent of the effects in the widerweb. In addition, though, spatial subsidies between compartmentswill tend to buffer individual compartments against the worstexcesses of disturbances within them. For instance, in the example
above, piscivorous ﬁsh, when their preferred prey are rare, mayswitch to the benthos rather than driving populations of thosepreferred prey to extinction. The apparent contradiction betweenthese two justiﬁcations of the stabilizing properties of compart-mentalization can be resolved if we emphasize the ﬁrst where aseemingly uniﬁed web is in fact a series of semidetached compart-
ments, and emphasize the second where seemingly separate websare in fact coupled. Thus, it may be that an intermediate degreeof compartmentalization is the most stable.
This chapter closes, then, with a
tone that has pervaded much of it: 
suggestive but uncertain. Further pro-gress, though, is essential. One standardanswer of ecologists to the layman’squestion ‘What does it matter if we losethat species?’ is, quite rightly, ‘But you must also consider the 
wider effects of that loss; losing that species may affect the wholefood web of which it is part’. The need for further understand-ing of those wider effects is intense.
Summary
In this chapter, we shift the focus to systems that usually have 
at least three trophic levels and with ‘many’ species.
We describe ‘unexpected’ effects in food webs, where, for 
example, the removal of a predator may lead to a decrease in prey abundance.
The indirect effect within food webs that has received most
attention is the trophic cascade. We discuss cascades in systems
with three and four trophic levels, and address the question ofwhether cascades are equally common in all types of habitat, requiring a distinction to be made between community- andspecies-level cascades. We ask whether food webs, or particulartypes of food web, are dominated by either top-down (trophiccascade) or bottom-up control. We then deﬁne and discuss theimportance of keystone species.
•• ••answers are
uncertain – but it isimportant that wediscover them12 11
4a5 6 7 8 9 103
213
1 4b14 15 1617 27 18
23 21 25 26
24 22
19
20a 20bMarine Terrestrial Fresh water
Figure 20.18 The major interactions
within and between three interconnected
habitats on Bear Island in the Arctic Ocean.1, plankton; 2, marine animals; 3, seals; 4a, plants; 4b, dead plants; 5, worms; 
6, geese; 7, Collembola; 8, Diptera; 9,mites; 10, Hymenoptera; 11, seabirds; 12, snow bunting; 13, purple sandpiper; 14, ptarmigan; 15, spiders; 16, ducks anddivers; 17, Arctic fox; 18, skua and glaucousgull; 19, planktonic algae; 20a, benthicalgae; 20b, decaying matter; 21, protozoa a;22, protozoa b; 23, invertebrates a; 24, Diptera; 25, invertebrates b; 
26, microcrustacean; 27, polar bear. (After Pimm & Lawton, 1980.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 599•• ••25
24
31
35
4323
22
334519
1834
4122021
26
2830
29
9
5327 47
1
8
14
6
10
161115
12
3913
3837404217364432Phytoplankton
Benthic producersBacteria <1 µm (small)
Bacteria >1 <2 µm (medium)
Bacteria >2 µm (large)
Acartia tonsa  (copepod)
Microciliates
MacrociliatesPredaceous ciliates
Chrysaora quinquecirrha(sea nettle)Mnemiopsis leidyi(comb jelly)Nemopsis bachei  (jellyfish)
Cladocera
Other zooplanktonAnchoa mitchilli  larvae
(anchovy)Anchoa mitchilli  eggs
Fish larvaeMarenzelleria viridis(polychaete)Nereis succinea  (polychaete)
Hetermastus filiformis(oIigochaete)Other polychaetesCorophium lacustre(amphipod)Leptocheirus plumulosus
(amphipod)Other meiofaunaMacoma baithica(Baltic clam)Macoma mitchelli(rosy clam)Rangia cuneata(wedge clam)Mulinia lateralis  (coot clam)
Mya arenaria(soft-shelled clam)Crassostrea virginica  (oyster)
Callinectes sapidus(blue crab)Anchoa mitchilli(bay anchovy)Micropogon undulatus(croaker)Trinectes maculatus(hogchoaker)Leiostomus xanthurus  (spot)
Cynoscion regalis  (weakfish)
Alosa sapidissima
(American shad)Alosa pseudoharengus(alewife)Alosa aestivalis
(bIue-back herring)
Brevoctia tyranus(menhaden)Morone americana(white perch)Morone saxatilis(striped bass)Pomatomas saltatrix(bluefish)Paralichthys dentatus(flounder)Arius felis  (catfish)1
234567
8
910
1112
131415
16
1718
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
262728
29
30
31
32333435
3637
383940
4142434445
Figure 20.19 Pictorial representation of the results of an analysis of a food web from Chesapeake Bay (see also Figure 20.13) in which
interactions between the 45 taxa were quantiﬁed and the taxa assigned to compartments (the number of which was not predetermine d) 
in such a way as to maximize the differential between the connectance within compartments (in this case 0.0099) and that betwee n
compartments (in this case 0.000087, more than two orders of magnitude lower). Food webs may be considered compartmentalized if  that
differential is sufﬁciently large. Arrows represent interactions and point from predator to prey: solid color, within compartme nts; dashed
lines, between compartments. (After Krause et al. , 2002.)EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 600••FOOD WEBS 601
Any ecological community can be characterized by its structure,
its productivity and its temporal stability. The variety of meanings
of ‘stability’ is outlined, distinguishing resilience and resistance,local and global stability, and dynamic fragility and robustness.
For many years, the ‘conventional wisdom’ was that more 
complex communities were more stable. We describe the simple
mathematical models that ﬁrst undermined this view. We showhow, in general, the effects of food web complexity on popula-tion stability in model systems has been equivocal, whereas foraggregate properties of whole model communities, such as theirbiomass or productivity, complexity (especially species richness)tends consistently to enhance stability.
In real communities, too, evidence is equivocal at the popula-
tion level, including both studies that have examined the rela-
tionships between species richness and connectance and those thathave manipulated richness experimentally. Again, turning to theaggregate, whole community level, evidence is largely consistentin supporting the prediction that increased richness increases stability (decreases variability). We stress, though, the importanceof the nature, not just the richness, of a community in these regards,returning to the importance of keystone species.Limitations and patterns in food chain length are discussed.
We examine the evidence that food chain length is limited by pro-
ductivity, by ‘productive space’ (productivity compounded by theextent of the community) or simply by ‘space’ – but that evidenceis inconclusive. We examine, too, the arguments that food chain
length is limited by dynamic fragility (ultimately unconvincing)or by constraints on predator design and behavior. There is a clearneed for rigorous studies of many more food webs beforeacceptable generalizations can be reached.
We examine work linking the prevalence of omnivory and 
its effect on food web stability, noting that earlier work foundomnivory to be rare and destabilizing, whereas later work foundit common and with no consistent effect on stability.
Finally, we ask whether food webs tend to be more com-
partmentalized than would be expected by chance. As long 
as habitat divisions are subtle, the evidence for compartments is typically poor, and there are even greater difﬁculties in demonstrating compartments (or the lack of them) withinhabitats. There is, though, a clear consensus from theoretical studies that communities will have increased stability if they are compartmentalized.
••EIPC20  10/24/05  2:16 PM  Page 601••21.1 Introduction
Why the number of species varies from
place to place, and from time to time,are questions that present themselves
not only to ecologists but to anybody who observes and pondersthe natural world. They are interesting questions in their own right
– but they are also questions of practical importance. A remark-able 44% of the world’s plant species and 35% of vertebratespecies (other than ﬁsh) are endemic to just 25 separate ‘hot spots’occupying a small proportion of the earth’s surface (Myers et al. ,
2000). Knowledge of the spatial distribution of species richness isa prerequisite for prioritizing conservation efforts both at a largescale (setting global priorities) and at a regional and local scale(setting national priorities). This aspect of conservation planningwill be discussed in Section 22.4.
It is important to distinguish be-
tween species richness (the number of
species present in a deﬁned geographical
unit – see Section 16.2) and biodiversity .
The term biodiversity makes frequent appearances in both thepopular media and the scientiﬁc literature – but it often does so without an unambiguous deﬁnition. At its simplest, biodiver-sity is synonymous with species richness. Biodiversity, though, can also be viewed at scales smaller and larger than the species. For example, we may include genetic diversity within species, recognizing the value of conserving genetically distinct sub-populations and subspecies. Above the species level, we may wishto ensure that species without close relatives are afforded special
protection, so that the overall evolutionary variety of the world’sbiota is maintained as large as possible. At a larger scale still, we may include in biodiversity the variety of community typespresent in a region – swamps, deserts, early and late stages in awoodland succession, and so on. Thus, ‘biodiversity’ may itself,quite reasonably, have a diversity of meanings. Yet it is necessary
to be speciﬁc if the term is to be of any practical use.
In this chapter we restrict our attention to species richness,
partly because of its fundamental nature but mainly because somany more data are available for this than for any other aspectof biodiversity. We will address several questions. Why do somecommunities contain more species than others? Are there patterns
or gradients of species richness? If so, what are the reasons for
these patterns? There are plausible answers to the questions weask, but these answers are by no means conclusive. Yet this is notso much a disappointment as a challenge to ecologists of the future.Much of the fascination of ecology lies in the fact that many ofthe problems are blatant, whereas the solutions are not. We willsee that a full understanding of patterns in species richness mustdraw on our knowledge of all the ecological topics dealt with 
so far in this book.
As with other areas of ecology, scale
is a paramount feature in discussions of species richness; explanations forpatterns usually have both smaller and larger scale components.Thus, the number of species living on a boulder in a river willreﬂect local inﬂuences such as the range of microhabitats provided(on the surface, in crevices and beneath the boulder) and the consequences of species interactions taking place (competition, predation, parasitism). However, larger scale inﬂuences of botha spatial and temporal nature will also be important. Thus, speciesrichness may be large on our boulder because the regional poolof species is itself large (in the river as a whole or, at a still largerscale, in the geographic region) or because there has been a long
interlude since the boulder was last turned over by a ﬂood (orsince the region was last glaciated). Comparatively more emphasishas been placed on local as opposed to regional questions in ecology, prompting Brown and Maurer (1989) to designate a subdiscipline of ecology as macroecology – to deal explicitly with
hot spots of species
richness
biodiversity andspecies richnessthe question of scale:macroecology
Chapter 21
Patterns in 
Species Richness
EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 602PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 603
understanding distribution and abundance at large spatial and 
temporal scales. Geographic patterns in species richness are a principal focus of macroecology (e.g. Gaston & Blackburn, 2000;Blackburn & Gaston, 2003).
21.1.1 Four types of factor affecting species richness
There are a number of factors to whichthe species richness of a community can
be related, and these are of several different types. First, there arefactors that can be referred to broadly as ‘geographic’, notablylatitude, altitude and, in aquatic environments, depth. These have
often been correlated with species richness, as we shall discussbelow, but presumably they cannot be causal agents in their ownright. If species richness changes with latitude, then there mustbe some other factor changing with latitude, exerting a direct effecton the communities.
A second group of factors does
indeed show a tendency to be correlatedwith latitude (or altitude or depth), butthey are not perfectly correlated. To 
the extent that they are correlated at all, they may play a part in
explaining latitudinal and other gradients. But because they arenot perfectly correlated, they serve also to blur the relationshipsalong these gradients. Such factors include climatic variability, the input of energy, the productivity of the environment, and possibly the ‘age’ of the environment and the ‘harshness’ of theenvironment.
A further group of factors vary geo-
graphically but quite independently oflatitude (or altitude, island location ordepth). They therefore tend to blur orcounteract relationships between species
richness and other factors. This is true of the amount of physical
disturbance a habitat experiences, the isolation of the habitat andthe extent to which it is physically and chemically heterogeneous.
Finally, there is a group of factors
that are biological attributes of a community, but are also important
inﬂuences on the structure of the community of which they are part. Notable amongst these are the amount of predation or parasitism in a community, the amount of competition, the spatial or architectural heterogeneity generated by the organisms themselves and the successional status of a community. Theseshould be thought of as ‘secondary’ factors in that they are them-selves the consequences of inﬂuences outside the community.Nevertheless, they can all play powerful roles in the ﬁnal shapingof community structure.
A number of these factors have been discussed in previous 
chapters (disturbance and successional status in Chapter 16,competition, predation and parasitism in Chapter 19). In this
chapter we continue by examining the relationships betweenspecies richness and factors that can be thought of as exerting aninﬂuence in their own right. We do this ﬁrst by considering factorswhose variation is primarily spatial (productivity, spatial hetero-
geneity, environmental harshness – Section 21.3) and, second, those whose variation is primarily temporal (climatic variation andenvironmental age – Section 21.4). We will then be in a positionto consider patterns in species richness related to habitat area andremoteness (island patterns – Section 21.5), before moving to gradients in species richness related to latitude, altitude, depth,succession and position in the fossil record (Section 21.6). InSection 21.7, we take a different tack by asking whether variations
in species richness themselves have consequences for the func-tioning of ecosystems (e.g. productivity, decomposition rate andnutrient cycling). We begin, though, by constructing a simple theoretical framework (following MacArthur (1972), probablythe greatest macroecologist, although he did not use the term) tohelp us think about variations in species richness.
21.2 A simple model of species richness
To try to understand the determinants of species richness, it will be
useful to begin with a simple model. Assume, for simplicity, thatthe resources available to a community can be depicted as a one-dimensional continuum, R units long (Figure 21.1). Each species
uses only a portion of this resource continuum, and these portions
deﬁne the niche breadths (n) of the various species: the average niche
breadth within the community is N. Some of these niches overlap,
and the overlap between adjacent species can be measured by avalue o. The average niche overlap within the community is then
I. With this simple background, it is possible to consider why some
communities should contain more species than others.
First, for given values of Nand I, a
community will contain more speciesthe larger the value of R, i.e. the greater
the range of resources (Figure 21.1a).
This is true when the community isdominated by competition and thespecies ‘partition’ the resources (seeSection 19.2). But, it will also presumably be true when com-petition is relatively unimportant. Wider resource spectra providethe means for existence of a wider range of species, whether ornot those species interact with one another.
Second, for a given range of resources, more species will be
accommodated if Nis smaller, i.e. if the species are more specialized
in their use of resources (Figure 21.1b).
Alternatively, if species overlap to a greater extent in their use
of resources (greater I),then more may coexist along the same
resource continuum (Figure 21.1c).
••geographic factors
factors correlated
with latitude
factors that areindependent oflatitude
a modelincorporating nichebreadth, nicheoverlap and resource range
biotic factorsEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 603••604 CHAPTER 21
Finally, a community will contain more species the more fully
saturated it is; conversely, it will contain fewer species when more
of the resource continuum is unexploited (Figure 21.1d).
21.2.1 The relationship between local and regional 
species richness
One way to assess the degree to whichcommunities are saturated with speciesis to plot the relationship between localspecies richness (assessed on a spatialscale where all the species could en-
counter each other in a community) and regional species richness
(the number of species in the regional pool that could theoretic-ally colonize the community). Local species richness is sometimesreferred to as αrichness (or αdiversity) and regional species 
richness as γrichness. If communities are saturated with species(i.e. the niche space is fully utilized), local richness will reach anasymptote in its relationship with regional richness (Figure 21.2a).This appears to be the case for the Brazilian ground-dwelling antcommunities studied by Soares et al. (2001) (Figure 21.2b). Similar
patterns have been described for aquatic and terrestrial plant
groups, ﬁsh, mammals and parasites, but nonsaturating patternshave just as often been described for a variety of taxa, includingﬁsh (Figure 21.2c), insects, birds, mammals, reptiles, molluscs andcorals (reviewed by Srivastava, 1999). Local regional richness plotsprovide a useful tool for addressing the question of commun-ity saturation, but they must be used with caution. For example,Loreau (2000) points out that the nature of the relationshipdepends on the way that total richness ( γ) is partitioned between
within-community ( α) and between-community richness ( β), and
this is a matter of the scale at which different communities are
distinguished from one another. In other words, researchers mighterroneously include within a single community several habitats thatshould be considered as different communities, or, alternatively,
••More species because
greater range of resources(larger R)
RRno
More species becauseeach is more specialized(smaller n)
More species becauseeach overlaps more withits neighbors (larger o)
More species because
resource axis is more fullyexploited (communitymore fully saturated)(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)Figure 21.1 A simple model of species
richness. Each species utilizes a portion n
of the available resources ( R), overlapping 
with adjacent species by an amount o.
More species may occur in one community
than in another (a) because a greater range of resources is present (larger R), 
(b) because each species is more specialized(smaller average n), (c) because each
species overlaps more with its neighbors(larger average o), or (d) because the
resource dimension is more fully exploited.(After MacArthur, 1972.)
local vs regional
richness – saturatedor unsaturatedcommunities?EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 604••PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 605
they may study local communities at an inappropriately small 
scale (e.g. 1 m2quadrats may have been too small to be ‘local’
communities in the ground-dwelling ant study of Soares et al., 2001).
21.2.2 Species interactions and the simple model of
species richness
We can also consider the relationshipbetween the model in Figure 21.1 andtwo important kinds of species interac-tions described in previous chapters – interspeciﬁc competitionand predation (see especially Chapter 19). If a community is
dominated by interspeciﬁc competition, the resources are likelyto be fully exploited. Species richness will then depend on the rangeof available resources, the extent to which species are specialistsand the permitted extent of niche overlap (see Figure 21.1a–c).
Predation, on the other hand, is cap-
able of exerting contrasting effects.First, we know that predators canexclude certain prey species; in the absence of these species thecommunity may then be less than fully saturated, in the sense
that some available resources may be unexploited (see Figure 21.1d).In this way, predation may reduce species richness. Second,though, predation may tend to keep species below their carryingcapacities for much of the time, reducing the intensity andimportance of direct interspeciﬁc competition for resources. Thismay then permit much more niche overlap and a greater rich-ness of species than in a community dominated by competition(see Figure 21.1c). Finally, predation may generate richness patterns similar to those produced by competition when preyspecies compete for ‘enemy-free space’ (see Chapter 8). Such ‘appar-ent competition’ means that invasion and the stable coexistenceof prey are favored by prey being sufﬁciently different fromother prey species already present. In other words, there may be
a limit to the similarity of prey that can coexist (equivalent to thepresumed limits to similarity of coexisting competitors).
21.3 Spatially varying factors that inﬂuence
species richness
21.3.1 Productivity and resource richness
For plants, the productivity of the en-
vironment can depend on whichevernutrient or condition is most limiting togrowth (dealt with in detail in Chapter 17). Broadly speaking, theproductivity of the environment for animals follows the same 
trends as for plants, both as a result of the changes in resourcelevels at the base of the food chain, and as a result of the changesin critical conditions such as temperature.
••20
1816
12
10
0 40 80 120
Regional species richness(b)
Local species richness
140 20 60 10014Regional richness(a)
Local richnessUnsaturated
Saturated
30
2622
6
210 40 70 100
Species in catchment(c)
Local species
25 55 851418
10
Figure 21.2 (a) In a saturated community, local richness is
expected to increase with regional richness at very low levels 
of regional richness, but to quickly reach an upper limit. In anunsaturated community, on the other hand, local richness isexpected to be a constant proportion of regional richness. 
(After Srivastava, 1999.) (b) Asymptotic relationship between local richness of litter-dwelling ant communities in 1 m
2quadrats
in 10 forest remnants in Brazil in relation to the size of the
regional species pool (assumed to be the total number of species in the forest remnant concerned). (After Soares et al. , 2001.) 
(c) Nonasymptotic relationship between local species richness
(number recorded over equal-sized areas of a river bed) andregional species pools (the number of species present in the entire drainage basin from which the local sample was drawn).(After Rosenzweig & Ziv, 1999.)the role of
competition
the role of predation
variations inproductivityEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 605606 CHAPTER 21
If higher productivity is correlated with a wider range of avail-
able resources, then this is likely to lead to an increase in species
richness (see Figure 21.1a). However, a more productive environ-ment may have a higher rate of supply of resources but not a greater variety of resources. This might lead to more individuals
per species rather than more species. Alternatively again, it is possible, even if the overall variety of resources is unaffected, thatrare resources in an unproductive environment may becomeabundant enough in a productive environment for extra speciesto be added, because more specialized species can be accom-modated (see Figure 21.1b).
In general, then, we might expect
species richness to increase with productivity – a contention that is 
supported by an analysis of the speciesrichness of trees in North America inrelation to a crude measure of availableenvironmental energy, potential evapo-
transpiration (PET). This is the amount of water that wouldevaporate or be transpired from a saturated surface (Figure 21.3a).However, while energy (heat and light) is necessary for treefunctioning, plants also depend critically on actual water availability;energy and water availability inevitably interact, since higherenergy inputs lead to more evapotranspiration and a greaterrequirement for water (Whittaker et al. , 2003). Thus, in a study
of southern African trees, species richness increased with wateravailability (annual rainfall), but ﬁrst increased and then decreased
with available energy (PET) (Figure 21.3b). We present and dis-cuss further hump-shaped relationships later in this section.
When the North American work (Figure 21.3a) was extended
to four vertebrate groups, species richness was found to be cor-related to some extent with tree species richness itself. However,the best correlations were consistently with PET (Figure 21.4).Why should animal species richness be positively correlated with crude atmospheric energy? The answer is not known withany certainty, but it may be because for an ectotherm, such as a reptile, extra atmospheric warmth would enhance the intakeand utilization of food resources. While for an endotherm, such as a bird, the extra warmth would mean less expenditure of resources in maintaining body temperature and more avail-able for growth and reproduction. In both cases, then, this couldlead to faster individual and population growth and thus tolarger populations. Warmer environments might therefore allowspecies with narrower niches to persist and such environmentsmay therefore support more species in total (see Figure 21.1b)(Turner et al. , 1996).
Sometimes there seems to be a direct relationship between 
animal species richness and plant productivity. This was the case,for example, for the relationship between bird species richness and mean annual net primary productivity in South Africa (vanRensburg et al. , 2002). In the cases of seed-eating rodents and 
seed-eating ants in the southwestern deserts of the United States,Brown and Davidson (1977) recorded strong positive correlationsbetween species richness and precipitation. In arid regions it iswell established that mean annual precipitation is closely related
to plant productivity and thus to the amount of seed resource 
•• ••160
120
80
40
00 600 1200 1800
PET (mm yr–1)(a)
(b)
Tree species richness
600
100200300400500
Annual rainfall (mm)
Potential evapotranspiration (mm)10203040506070
2004001400
60080010001200Number of species
Figure 21.3 (a) Species richness of trees in North America, 
north of the Mexican border (in which the continent has been
divided into 336 quadrats following lines of latitude and longitude)in relation to potential evapotranspiration (PET). (After Currie & Paquin, 1987; Currie, 1991.) (b) Species richness of southern
African trees (in 25,000 km
2cells) as a function of annual rainfall
and PET. The surface describes the regression model between
species richness, annual rainfall and PET, and the stalks show the residual variation associated with each data point. (After Whittaker et al. , 2003; data from O’Brien, 1993.)increased
productivity mightlead to . . .. . . increased richness . . .EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 606PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 607
available. It is particularly noteworthy that in species-rich sites,
the communities contained more species of very large ants (whichconsume large seeds) and more species of very small ants (whichtake small seeds) (Davidson, 1977). It seems that either the rangeof sizes of seeds is greater in the more productive environments
(see Figure 21.1a) or the abundance of seeds becomes sufﬁci-ent to support extra consumer species with narrower niches (see Figure 21.1b).
On the other hand, an increase in
diversity with productivity is by nomeans universal, as noted in the uni-que Parkgrass experiment which started 
in 1856 at Rothamstead in England (see Section 16.2.1). A 3.2 ha(8-acre) pasture was divided into 20 plots, two serving as con-
trols and the others receiving a fertilizer treatment once a year.While the unfertilized areas remained essentially unchanged, thefertilized areas showed a progressive decline in species richness(and diversity).
Such declines have long been recognized. Rosenzweig (1971)
referred to them as illustrating the ‘paradox of enrichment’. Onepossible resolution of the paradox is that high productivity leadsto high rates of population growth, bringing about the extinction
of some of the species present because of a speedy conclusion toany potential competitive exclusion. At lower productivity, theenvironment is more likely to have changed before competitiveexclusion is achieved. An association between high productivity
and low species richness has been found in several other studiesof plant communities (reviewed by Cornwell & Grubb, 2003).
It is perhaps not surprising, then,
that several studies have demonstratedboth an increase and a decrease in rich-ness with increasing productivity – thatis, that species richness may be highestat intermediate levels of productivity.Species richness is low at the lowest productivities because of 
a shortage of resources, but also declines at the highest pro-ductivities where competitive exclusions speed rapidly to their conclusion. For instance, there are humped curves when the species richness of desert rodents is plotted against precipitation(and thus productivity) along a gradient in Israel (Abramsky &Rosenzweig, 1983), when the species richness of central Europeanplants is plotted against soil nutrient supply (Cornwell & Grubb,
•• ••. . . or decreased
richness . . .. . . or an increasethen a decrease(hump-shapedrelationships)200
100
5090
50
10
50
10
5
1
050
10
5
1
0
500 1000 1500 2000500 1000 1500 2000
500 1000 1500 2000500 1000 1500 2000(a) Birds (b) Mammals
(c) Amphibians (d) ReptilesSpecies richness
Potential evapotranspiration (mm yr–1)
Figure 21.4 Species richness of (a) birds, (b) mammals, (c) amphibians, and (d) reptiles in North America in relation to potential
evapotranspiration. (After Currie, 1991.)EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 607608 CHAPTER 21
2003) and when the species richness of various taxonomic groups
is plotted against gross primary productivity in the open waterzones of lakes in North America (Figure 21.5a). An analysis of awide range of such studies found that when communities of thesame general type (e.g. tallgrass prairie) but differing in product-
ivity were compared (Figure 21.5b), a positive relationship wasthe most common ﬁnding in animal studies (with fair numbers ofhumped and negative relationships), whereas with plants, humpedrelationships were the most common, with smaller numbers ofpositives and negatives (and even some unexplained U-shaped
curves). When Venterink et al. (2003) assessed the relationship
between plant species richness and plant productivity in 150 Euro-pean wetland sites that differed in the nutrient that was limitingproductivity (nitrogen, phosphorus or potassium), they found
hump-shaped patterns for nitrogen- and phosphorus-limited sitesbut species richness declined monotonically with productivity inpotassium-limited sites. Clearly, increased productivity can anddoes lead to increased or decreased species richness – or both.
•• ••log10 (species richness)(a)
4 3 10
012
2R2 = 0.40, P = 0.01Phytoplankton
4 3 10
012
2R2 = 0.46, P = 0.003Macrophytes4 3 10
012
2R2 = 0.51, P < 0.001Copepods
4 3 10
012
2
log10 (PPR)R2 = 0.49, P < 0.001Cladocerans4 3 10
012
2R2 = 0.54, P < 0.001Rotifers
4 3 10
012
2R2 = 0.48, P < 0.001FishPercentage of studies(b)
04080Vascular plants
2060n = 39Humped
Positive
Negative
U-shape
None
Productivity–diversity patterns04080Animals
2060n = 23Humped
Positive
Negative
U-shape
None
Figure 21.5 (a) Species richness of various taxonomic groups in lakes in North America plotted against gross primary productivity (PPR), 
with ﬁtted quadratic regression lines (all signiﬁcant at P<0.01). (After Dodson et al. , 2000.) (b) Percentage of published studies on plants
and animals showing various patterns of relationship between species richness and productivity. (After Mittelbach et al. , 2001.)EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 608PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 609
Productivity often, perhaps always,
exerts its inﬂuence on species richness
in combination with other factors. Thus,we saw earlier how grazer-mediatedcoexistence was most likely to occur 
in nutrient-rich situations where plant
productivity is high, whereas grazing in nutrient-poor, unproductivesettings was associated with a reduction in plant richness (seeSection 19.4). Moreover, disturbance (dealt with in Chapter 16)can also interact with nutrient supply (productivity) to determinespecies richness patterns. Wilson and Tilman (2002) monitoredfor 8 years the effects of four levels each of disturbance (differentamounts of annual tilling) and nitrogen addition (in a completefactorial design) on species richness in agricultural ﬁelds that had
been abandoned 30 years previously. Species richness showed ahump-shaped relationship with disturbance in the zero nitrogenand lowest nitrogen addition treatments because over time, at intermediate disturbance levels, annual plants colonized plotsthat would otherwise have become dominated by perennials.However, there was no relationship between species richness and disturbance in the high nitrogen treatments, where clearlycompetitively dominant species emerged even in disturbed plots (Figure 21.6). The higher nutrient levels were presumablysufﬁcient to support rapid growth of competitive dominants, and to lead to competitive exclusion of subordinates between disturbance episodes.
21.3.2 Spatial heterogeneity
We have already seen how the patchy nature of an environ-
ment, coupled with aggregative behavior, can lead to coexist-ence of competing species (see Section 8.5.5). In addition, environments that are more spatially heterogeneous can beexpected to accommodate extra species because they provide 
a greater variety of microhabitats, a greater range of micro-climates, more types of places to hide from predators and so on.In effect, the extent of the resource spectrum is increased (see Figure 21.1a).
In some cases, it has been possible
to relate species richness to the spatialheterogeneity of the abiotic environ-ment. For instance, a study of plantspecies growing in 51 plots alongside 
the Hood River, Canada, revealed a positive relationship be-
tween species richness and an index of spatial heterogeneity(based, among other things, on the number of categories of 
substrate, slope, drainage regimes andsoil pH present) (Figure 21.7a).
Most studies of spatial heterogeneity,
though, have related the species richness
of animals to the structural diversity ofthe plants in their environment (Figure 21.7b–d), occasionally as
a result of experimental manipulation of the plants, as with thespiders in Figure 21.7b, but more commonly through comparisonsof different natural communities (Figure 21.7c, d). However,whether spatial heterogeneity arises intrinsically from the abioticenvironment or is provided by other biological components ofthe community, it is capable of promoting an increase in speciesrichness.
•• ••
Species richness
Disturbance (%)100 2500510
5017 g N m–2 yr–1051015
0 g N m–2 yr–1
0510152 g N m–2 yr–1
0510
9.5 g N m–2 yr–1
Figure 21.6 Species richness in old ﬁelds in Minnesota, USA,
after 8 years across four levels of disturbance (quantiﬁed in terms
of the percentage of bare ground produced by annual tilling) atfour levels of nitrogen addition. Dots are values from replicateplots (1 m
2) and open circles are treatment means. Regression 
lines are shown only for signiﬁcant relationships ( P<0.05). 
(After Wilson & Tilman, 2002.)productivity may
affect speciesrichness incombination withother factors
richness andheterogeneity in anabiotic environment
animal richnessrelated to plantspatial heterogeneityEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 609•• ••610 CHAPTER 21
30
2622
18
14
10
10 15 25
Tree species richness35 45 50Ant species richness(d)
20 30 40Aug 6
Number of spider species per  branch(b)
024681012
Sep 5
Oct 2
Oct 22
Seasonal
meanControl Bare
Patchy Thinned
Tied
0 1.8 2.0
Number of fish species
Index of vegetation diversity11
10
9
8
76
54321
0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6(c)70
6050
40
302010
0
0.1 0.2 0.3
Index of environmental heterogeneity0.4 0.5 0.6Number of vascular plant species(a)
Figure 21.7 Relationship between the
number of plants per 300 m2plot beside
the Hood River, Northwest Territories,
Canada, and an index (ranging from 0 to 1)of spatial heterogeneity in abiotic factorsassociated with topography and soil. 
(After Gould & Walker, 1997.) (b) In anexperimental study, the number of spiderspecies living on Douglas ﬁr branchesincreases with their structural diversity.Those ‘bare’, ‘patchy’ or ‘thinned’ wereless diverse than normal (‘control’) byvirtue of having needles removed; those‘tied’ were more diverse because theirtwigs were entwined together. (After Halaj
et al. , 2000.) (c) Relationships between
animal species richness and an index ofstructural diversity of vegetation forfreshwater ﬁsh in 18 Wisconsin lakes.(After Tonn & Magnuson, 1982.) (d) Relationship between arboreal antspecies richness in two regions of Braziliansavanna and the species richness of trees (a surrogate for spatial heterogeneity). 
7, Distrito Federal; /H17033, Paraopeba region.
(After Ribas et al. , 2003.)EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 610••PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 611
21.3.3 Environmental harshness
Environments dominated by an
extreme abiotic factor – often called
harsh environments – are more difﬁcult to recognize than mightbe immediately apparent. An anthropocentric view mightdescribe as extreme both very cold and very hot habitats, unusu-
ally alkaline lakes and grossly polluted rivers. However, specieshave evolved and live in all such environments, and what is verycold and extreme for us must seem benign and unremarkable toa penguin in the Antarctic.
We might try to get around the problem of deﬁning envir-
onmental harshness by ‘letting the organisms decide’. An envir-onment may be classiﬁed as extreme if organisms, by their failure
to live there, show it to be so. But if the claim is to be made –as it often is – that species richness is lower in extreme environ-
ments, then this deﬁnition is circular, and it is designed to provethe very claim we wish to test.
Perhaps the most reasonable deﬁnition of an extreme condi-
tion is one that requires, of any organism tolerating it, a mor-phological structure or biochemical mechanism that is not foundin most related species and is costly, either in energetic terms orin terms of the compensatory changes in the organism’s biolog-ical processes that are needed to accommodate it. For example,plants living in highly acidic soils (low pH) may be affecteddirectly through injury by hydrogen ions or indirectly viadeﬁciencies in the availability and uptake of important resourcessuch as phosphorus, magnesium and calcium. In addition, alu-minum, manganese and heavy metals may have their solubility
increased to toxic levels, and mycorrhizal activity and nitrogenﬁxation may be impaired. Plants can only tolerate low pH if theyhave speciﬁc structures or mechanisms allowing them to avoidor counteract these effects.Environments that experience a low
pH can thus be considered harsh, and
the mean number of plant species re-corded per sampling unit in a study inthe Alaskan Arctic tundra was indeedlowest in soils of low pH (Figure 21.8a).Similarly, the species richness of benthic stream invertebrates 
in the Ashdown Forest (southern UK) was markedly lower in 
the more acidic streams (Figure 21.8b). Further examples ofextreme environments that are associated with low species richness include hot springs, caves and highly saline water bodies such as the Dead Sea. The problem with these examples,however, is that they are also characterized by other features associated with low species richness such as low productivity and low spatial heterogeneity. In addition, many occupy small 
areas (caves, hot springs) or areas that are rare compared to other types of habitat (only a small proportion of the streams in southern England are acidic). Hence extreme environments can often be seen as small and isolated islands. We will see inSection 21.5.1 that these features, too, are usually associatedwith low species richness. Although it appears reasonable that intrinsically extreme environments should as a consequence support few species, this has proved an extremely difﬁcult pro-position to establish.
21.4 Temporally varying factors that inﬂuence
species richness
Temporal variation in conditions and resources may be predict-
able or unpredictable and operate on timescales from minutesthrough to centuries and millennia. All may inﬂuence species richness in profound ways.
••Figure 21.8 (a) The number of plant
species per 72 m2sampling unit in the
Alaskan Arctic tundra increases with pH.
(After Gough et al. , 2000.) (b) The number
of taxa of invertebrates in streams inAshdown Forest, southern England,
increases with the pH of the streamwater.(After Townsend et al. , 1983.) 56 7
Mean stream pH60Number of invertebrate taxa40
20
0(b)
50
4540
35
3025201510
5
0
37Number of species
Soil pH(a)
456y = –36.35 + 12.98* x
R2 = 0.82
P < 0.001
Snowbed
TussockWatertrack
what is harsh?are harsh
environments the cause of lowspecies richness?EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 611612 CHAPTER 21
21.4.1 Climatic variation
The effects of climatic variation on
species richness depend on whetherthe variation is predictable or unpre-dictable (measured on timescales thatmatter to the organisms involved). In
a predictable, seasonally changing environment, different species
may be suited to conditions at different times of the year. Morespecies might therefore be expected to coexist in a seasonal envir-onment than in a completely constant one (see Figure 21.1a).Different annual plants in temperate regions, for instance, germin-ate, grow, ﬂower and produce seeds at different times during aseasonal cycle; while phytoplankton and zooplankton pass througha seasonal succession in large, temperate lakes with a variety ofspecies dominating in turn as changing conditions and resources
become suitable for each.
On the other hand, there are oppor-
tunities for specialization in nonsea-sonal environments that do not exist in seasonal environments. For example,it would be difﬁcult for a long-lived
obligate fruit-eater to exist in a seasonal environment when fruit is available for only a very limited portion of the year. Butsuch specialization is found repeatedly in nonseasonal, tropical environments where fruit of one type or another is available continuously.
Unpredictable climatic variation
(climatic instability) could have a 
number of effects on species richness:(i) stable environments may be able tosupport specialized species that would
be unlikely to persist where conditions or resources ﬂuctuated dramatically (see Figure 21.1b); (ii) stable environments aremore likely to be saturated with species (see Figure 21.1d); and(iii) theory suggests that a higher degree of niche overlap will be found in more stable environments (see Figure 21.1c). All these
processes could increase species richness. On the other hand, populations in a stable environment are more likely to reach theircarrying capacities, the community is more likely to be domin-ated by competition, and species are therefore more likely to beexcluded by competition (where Iis smaller, see Figure 21.1c).
Some studies have seemed to sup-
port the notion that species richness
increases as climatic variation decreases.For example, there is a signiﬁcant negative relationship between speciesrichness and the range of monthly mean temperatures for birds,mammals and gastropods that inhabit the west coast of NorthAmerica (from Panama in the south to Alaska in the north)(Figure 21.9). However, this correlation does not prove causation,
since there are many other things that change between Panamaand Alaska. There is no established relationship between climaticinstability and species richness.
21.4.2 Environmental age: evolutionary time
It has also often been suggested that
communities that are ‘disturbed’ evenon very extended timescales may nonethe less lack species because they haveyet to reach an ecological or an evolutionary equilibrium. Thus
communities may differ in species richness because some are closer to equilibrium and are therefore more saturated than others (see Figure 21.1d).
For example, many have argued that
the tropics are richer in species than aremore temperate regions at least in partbecause the tropics have existed overlong and uninterrupted periods of evolutionary time, whereas the temperate regions are still recovering from the Pleistocene
•• ••Number of species(a) Birds
600
500400300200
100
5 0 1 01 52 02 5(b) Mammals
150
100
50
0 51 0 1 5 2 0 2 5
Temperature range ( °C)(c) Gastropods
2468 1 0200
150
100
50
0
Figure 21.9 Relationships between species richness and the range of monthly mean temperatures at sites along the west coast of North
America for (a) birds, (b) mammals and (c) gastropods. (After MacArthur, 1975.)
temporal niche
differentiation in seasonalenvironments
specialization innonseasonalenvironments
climatic instabilitymay increase ordecrease richness . . .. . . but there is nogood evidence eitherway
variable recoveryfrom an ancientdisturbance?
unchanging tropicsand recoveringtemperate zones?EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 612PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 613
glaciations. It seems, however, that the long-term stability of the
tropics has in the past been greatly exaggerated by ecologists.Whereas the climatic and biotic zones of the temperate regionmoved toward the equator during the glaciations, the tropical forest appears to have contracted to a limited number of small
refuges surrounded by grasslands. A simplistic contrast betweenthe unchanging tropics and the disturbed and recovering temperateregions is therefore untenable.
A comparison between the two polar regions may be more
instructive. Both Arctic and Antarctic marine environments arecold, seasonal and strongly inﬂuenced by ice but their historiesare quite different. The Arctic basin lost its fauna when coveredby thick permanent ice at the height of the last glaciation and recol-onization is underway; whereas a shallow water fauna has
existed around the Antarctic since the mid-Palaeozoic (Clarke &Crame, 2003). Today the two polar faunas contrast markedly, theArctic being depauperate and the Antarctic rich, most likelyreﬂecting the importance of their histories.
21.5 Habitat area and remoteness: 
island biogeography
It is well established that the number 
of species on islands decreases as islandarea decreases. Such a species–area rela-tionship is shown in Figure 21.10a for terrestrial vascular plants
on islands in the Stockholm Archipelago, Sweden.
‘Islands’, however, need not be islands of land in a sea of 
water. Lakes are islands in a ‘sea’ of land, mountain tops are high-
altitude islands in a low-altitude ocean, gaps in a forest canopywhere tree have fallen are islands in a sea of trees, and there canbe islands of particular geological types, soil types or vegetationtypes surrounded by dissimilar types of rock, soil or vegetation.Species–area relationships can be equally apparent for thesetypes of islands (Figure 21.10b–d).
The relationship between species richness and habitat area is
one of the most consistent of all ecological patterns. However,
the pattern raises an important question: ‘Is the impoverishment ofspecies on islands more than would be expected in comparablysmall areas of mainland?’ In other words, does the characteristicisolation of islands contribute to their impoverishment of species?These are important questions for an understanding of commun-ity structure since there are many oceanic islands, many lakes,many mountaintops, many woodlands surrounded by ﬁelds, manyisolated trees, and so on.
21.5.1 MacArthur and Wilson’s ‘equilibrium’ theory
Probably the most obvious reason why larger areas should con-
tain more species is that larger areas typically encompass more
•• ••larger islands contain
more species:contrastingexplanations
0.5200Number of species(a)
Area (ha)160
120
080
40
50 20 10 5 13 0.01100
10
1
10.0 0.1 1.0(b)
Lake surface area (km2)Number of species
1231.2
Log area (m2)Log number of species(c)
041
0.8
0.60.40.2
0
10 100 1000 10,000 100,0005
4
32
1
Area of source pool (m
2)(d)Number of species1999
1908
Figure 21.10 Species–area relationships.
(a) Plants on islands east of Stockholm,
Sweden: /H17033, survey completed in 1999 
after grazing and hay-making had ceased; 
/H17039survey completed in 1908 when intensive
agriculture was practised. (After Lofgren &Jerling, 2002.) (b) Birds inhabiting lakes inFlorida. (After Hoyer & Canﬁeld, 1994.) (c) Bats inhabiting different-sized caves in
Mexico. (After Brunet & Medellin, 2001.)(d) Fish living in Australian desert springsthat have source pools of different sizes. (After Kodric-Brown & Brown, 1993.)EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 613614 CHAPTER 21
different types of habitat. However, MacArthur and Wilson
(1967) believed this explanation to be too simple. In their equi-
librium theory of island biogeography , they argued: (i) that island 
size and isolation themselves played important roles – that thenumber of species on an island is determined by a balance
between immigration and extinction; (ii) that this balance isdynamic, with species continually going extinct and being replaced(through immigration) by the same or by different species; and(iii) that immigration and extinction rates may vary with islandsize and isolation.
Taking immigration ﬁrst, imagine an
island that as yet contains no species atall. The rate of immigration of species
will be high, because any colonizing
individual represents a species new to
that island. However, as the number of resident species rises, therate of immigration of new, unrepresented species diminishes. Theimmigration rate reaches zero when all species from the sourcepool (i.e. from the mainland or from other nearby islands) arepresent on the island in question (Figure 21.11a).
The immigration graph is drawn as a curve, because immi-
gration rate is likely to be particularly high when there are lownumbers of residents and many of the species with the greatestpowers of dispersal are yet to arrive. In fact, the curve should reallybe a blur rather than a single line, since the precise curve will dependon the exact sequence in which species arrive, and this will varyby chance. In this sense, the immigration curve can be thought
of as the most probable curve .The exact immigration curve will depend on the degree of
remoteness of the island from its pool of potential colonizers 
(Figure 21.11a). The curve will always reach zero at the same point(when all members of the pool are resident), but it will generallyhave higher values on islands close to the source of immigration
than on more remote islands, since colonizers have a greater chance of reaching an island the closer it is to the source. It is alsolikely that immigration rates will generally be higher on a largeisland than on a small island, since the larger island represents a larger target for the colonizers (Figure 21.11a).
The rate of species extinction on 
an island (Figure 21.11b) is bound to bezero when there are no species there,and it will generally be low when there
are few species. However, as the number of resident speciesrises, the extinction rate is assumed by the theory to increase, prob-ably at a more than proportionate rate. This is thought to occurbecause with more species, competitive exclusion becomes morelikely, and the population size of each species is on averagesmaller, making it more vulnerable to chance extinction. Similarreasoning suggests that extinction rates should be higher on smallthan on large islands as population sizes will typically be smalleron small islands (Figure 21.11b). As with immigration, the extinc-tion curves are best seen as ‘most probable’ curves.
In order to see the net effect of
immigration and extinction, their twocurves can be superimposed (Figure
21.11c). The number of species where
•• ••(c)
Number of resident speciesClose, large
Close, small
Distant, smallDistant, large
Small
LargeImmigration rate (      )
or extinction rate (      )
S*CL S*DS
S*DL S*CSExtinction rate(b)
Number of resident speciesSmall island
Large islandImmigration rateClose or large
island
Distant or small
island(a)
Size of
species
pool
Number of resident species
Figure 21.11 MacArthur and Wilson’s (1976) equilibrium theory of island biogeography. (a) The rate of species immigration on to 
an island, plotted against the number of resident species on the island, for large and small islands and for close and distant islands. 
(b) The rate of species extinction on an island, plotted against the number of resident species on the island, for large and sm all islands. 
(c) The balance between immigration and extinction on small and large and on close and distant islands. In each case, S*is the equilibrium
species richness; C, close; D, distant; L, large; S, small.
MacArthur and
Wilson’s immigrationcurves . . .. . . and extinctioncurves
the balance betweenimmigration andextinctionEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 614PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 615
the curves cross ( S*) is a dynamic equilibrium and should be the
characteristic species richness for the island in question. Below
S*, richness increases (immigration rate exceeds extinction rate);
above S*, richness decreases (extinction exceeds immigration). The
theory, then, makes a number of predictions:
1The number of species on an island should eventually become
roughly constant through time.
2This should be a result of a continual turnover of species, with
some becoming extinct and others immigrating.
3Large islands should support more species than small islands.
4Species number should decline with the increasing remotenessof an island.
Note, though, that several of these
predictions could also be made without
any reference to the equilibrium theory.An approximate constancy of speciesnumber would be expected if richness
were determined simply by island type. Similarly, a higher rich-ness on larger islands would be expected as a consequence of largerislands having more habitat types. One test of the equilibrium theory, therefore, would be whether richness increases with area at a rate greater than could be accounted for by increases in habitat diversity alone (see Section 21.5.2).
The effect of island remoteness can be considered quite 
separately from the equilibrium theory. Merely recognizing 
that many species are limited in their dispersal ability, and havenot yet colonized all islands, leads to the prediction that moreremote islands are less likely to be saturated with potential colonizers (see Section 21.5.3). However, the ﬁnal predictionarising from the equilibrium theory – constancy as a result ofturnover – is truly characteristic of the equilibrium theory (seeSection 21.5.4).
21.5.2 Habitat diversity alone – or a separate effect 
of area?
The most fundamental question in
island biogeography, then, is whetherthere is an ‘island effect’ as such, orwhether islands simply support few
species because they are small areas containing few habitats.
Does richness increase with area at a rate greater than could be
accounted for by increases in habitat diversity alone? Some studies have attempted to partition species–area variation onislands into that which can be entirely accounted for in terms ofhabitat diversity, and that which remains and must be accountedfor by island area in its own right. For beetles on the Canary Islands, the relationship between species richness and habitatdiversity (as measured by plant species richness) is much strongerthan that with island area, and this is particularly marked for the
herbivorous beetles, presumably because of their particular foodplant requirements (Figure 21.12a).
On the other hand, in a study of 
a variety of animal groups living on the Lesser Antilles island in the WestIndies, the variation in species richnessfrom island to island was partitioned, statistically, into that attributable to island area alone, that attrib-utable to habitat diversity alone, that attributable to correlatedvariation between area and habitat diversity (and hence notattributable to either alone), and that attributable to neither. For reptiles and amphibians (Figure 21.12b), like the beetles of the Canary Islands, habitat diversity was far more important
than island area. But for bats, the reverse was the case, and forbirds and butterﬂies, both area itself and habitat diversity had important parts to play.
An experiment was carried out to 
try to separate the effects of habitatdiversity and area on some small mangrove islands in the Bay of Florida(Simberloff, 1976). These islands consist of pure stands of the mangrove species Rhizophora mangle , which support communities
of insects, spiders, scorpions and isopods. After a preliminary faunal survey, some islands were reduced in size – by means ofa power saw. Habitat diversity was not affected, but arthropodspecies richness on three islands none the less diminished over 
a period of 2 years (Figure 21.13). A control island, the size ofwhich was unchanged, showed a slight increase in richness over
the same period, presumably as a result of random events.
Another way of trying to distinguish
a separate effect of island area is tocompare species–area graphs for islandswith those for arbitrarily deﬁned areasof mainland. The species–area relation-ships for mainland areas should be due
almost entirely to habitat diversity (together with any ‘sampling’effect involving increased probabilities of detecting rare speciesin larger areas). All species will be well able to ‘disperse’ betweenmainland areas, and the continual ﬂow of individuals across thearbitrary boundaries will therefore mask local extinctions (i.e. what would be an extinction on an island is soon reversed by the exchange of individuals between local areas). An arbitrarilydeﬁned area of mainland should thus contain more species than
an otherwise equivalent island, and this is usually interpreted asmeaning that the slopes of the species–area graphs for islands should be steeper than those for mainland areas (since the effectof island isolation should be most marked on small islands, whereextinctions are most likely). The difference between the two typesof graph would then be attributable to the island effect in its ownright. Table 21.1 shows that despite considerable variation, theisland graphs do typically have steeper slopes.
•• ••predictions of
equilibrium theoryare not all exclusiveto this theorypartitioning variationbetween habitatdiversity and islandarea itself
experimentalreductions inmangrove island area
species–area graphsfor islands andcomparablemainland areas
an example wherehabitat diversity isparamountEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 615•• ••616 CHAPTER 21
Note that a reduced number of species per unit area on
islands should also lead to a lower value for the intercept on 
the S-axis of the species–area graph. Figure 21.14a illustrates
both an increased slope and a reduced value for the intercept for the species–area graph for ant species on isolated Paciﬁc
islands, compared with the graph for progressively smaller areas of the very large island of New Guinea. Figure 21.14b givesa similar relationship for reptiles on islands off the coast of South Australia.0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 0 200 400 600 800 1000250
200150
100
50
0250
200150100
50
0Number of species
Island area (km2) Number of plant species(a)
Bats Reptiles and
amphibiansBirds Butterflies1.0Proportion of variance(b)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.20.0Neither
Habitat diversity
Both
Island area
Figure 21.12 (a) The relationships between species richness of herbivorous ( 7) and carnivorous ( /H17009) beetles of the Canary Islands and both
island area and plant species richness. (After Becker, 1992.) (b) Proportion of variance, for four animal groups, in species ri chness among
islands in the Lesser Antilles related uniquely to island area, uniquely to habitat diversity, to correlated variation between area and habitat
diversity and unexplained by either. (After Ricklefs & Lovette, 1999.)
Number of species
1000 500 100505075100
225
Island area (m2)Island 1
Island 2Island 3
Control
island1969 census
1970 census1971 census
Figure 21.13 (left) The effect on the number of arthropod species
of artiﬁcially reducing the size of mangrove islands. Islands 1 and 2
were reduced in size after both the 1969 and 1970 censuses. Island3 was reduced only after the 1969 census. The control island wasnot reduced, and the change in its species richness was attributable
to random ﬂuctuations. (After Simberloff, 1976.)EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 616•• ••PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 617
Overall, therefore, studies like this
suggest a separate area effect (larger
islands are larger targets for coloniza-tion; populations on larger islandshave a lower risk of extinction) beyond
a simple correlation between area and habitat diversity. Lofgren
and Jerling (2002) were able to quantify plant extinction rates andimmigration rates on islands of different sizes in the StockholmArchipelago (see Figure 21.10a) by comparing species lists intheir survey (1996–99) with those reported by J. W. Hamner fromthe period 1884–1908. In the intervening time, 93 new speciesappeared while 20 species disappeared from the islands. Many of the newcomers were trees, bushes and shade-tolerant shrubs,reﬂecting succession after the cessation of cattle grazing and hay-
making in the 1960s. Despite the confounding effect of succession,and as predicted, extinction rate was negatively correlated and immigration rate positively correlated with island size.Table 21.1 Values of the slope z, of species–area curves 
(log S=logC+zlog A, where Sis species richness, Ais area and 
Cis a constant giving the number of species when Ahas a value 
of 1), for arbitrary areas of mainland, oceanic islands and habitat
islands. (After Preston, 1962; May, 1975b; Gorman, 1979; Browne,
1981; Matter et al. , 2002; Barrett et al. , 2003; Storch et al. , 2003.)
Taxonomic group Location z
Arbitrary areas of mainland
Birds Central Europe 0.09Flowering plants England 0.10Birds Neoarctic 0.12Savanna vegetation Brazil 0.14Land plants Britain 0.16Birds Neotropics 0.16
Oceanic islands
Birds New Zealand islands 0.18Lizards Californian islands 0.20Birds West Indies 0.24Birds East Indies 0.28Birds East Central Paciﬁc 0.30Ants Melanesia 0.30Land plants Galápagos 0.31Beetles West Indies 0.34Mammals Scandinavian islands 0.35
Habitat islands
Zooplankton (lakes) New York State 0.17Snails (lakes) New York State 0.23Fish (lakes) New York State 0.24Birds (Paramo vegetation) Andes 0.29Mammals (mountains) Great Basin, USA 0.43Terrestrial invertebrates (caves) West Virginia 0.72
plant extinction and
immigration rates inrelation to island sizeCumulativefaunaonmainland
1,000,000 10,000 10010.0110100
Log area (km2)(b)
1Number of species Number of species
1,000,000 10,000 1001110100
1000
Area of island (square miles)(a)
100,000 10CumulativefaunaonNewGuinea
Figure 21.14 (a) The species–area graph for ponerine ants on
various Moluccan and Melanesian islands compared with a graph
for different-sized sample areas on the very large island of NewGuinea. (After Wilson, 1961.) (b) The species–area graph forreptiles on islands off the coast of South Australia compared with
the mainland species–area relationship. In this case, the islandswere formed within the last 10,000 years as a result of rising sealevel. (After Richman et al. , 1988.)EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 617••618 CHAPTER 21
21.5.3 Remoteness
It follows from the above argument that the island effect and the
species impoverishment of an island should be greater for moreremote islands. (Indeed, the comparison of islands with mainlandareas is only an extreme example of a comparison of islands vary-ing in remoteness, since local mainland areas can be thought of
as having minimal remoteness.) Remoteness, however, can meantwo things. First, it can simply refer to the degree of physical isolation. Alternatively, a single island can also itself vary inremoteness, depending on the type of organism being considered:the same island may be remote from the point of view of landmammals but not from the point of view of birds.
The effects of remoteness can be
demonstrated either by plotting speciesrichness against remoteness itself, or
by comparing the species–area graphsof groups of islands (or for groups of
organisms) that differ in their remoteness (or powers of colon-ization). In either case, there can be considerable difﬁculty in extricating the effects of remoteness from all the other charac-teristics by which two islands may differ. Nevertheless, the directeffect of remoteness can be seen in Figure 21.15 for nonmarine,lowland birds on tropical islands in the southwest Paciﬁc. Withincreasing distance from the large source island of New Guinea,there is a decline in the number of species, expressed as a per-centage of the number present on an island of similar area but
••close to New Guinea. Species richness decreases exponentially 
with distance, approximately halving every 2600 km. The species–area graph in Figure 21.16a also shows that remote islands of agiven size possess fewer species than their counterparts close to
a land mass. In addition, Figure 21.16b contrasts the species–area
graphs of two classes of organisms in two regions: the relatively
remote Azores (in the Atlantic, far to the west of Portugal) and theChannel Islands (close to the north coast of France). Whereas theAzores are indeed far more remote than the Channel Islands from the point of view of the birds, the two island groups areapparently equally remote for ferns, which are particularly gooddispersers because of their light, wind-blown spores. Thus, on thebasis of all these examples, the species impoverishment causedby the island effect does indeed appear to increase as the degree
of isolation of the island increases. Note, also, that a multiple regres-sion analysis of Lofgren and Jerling’s 1999 Stockholm Archipelagodatabase (see Figure 21.10a) demonstrated the overriding effect ofisland area on plant species richness (73% of variation explained),but distance to the nearest island also contributed signiﬁcantly,explaining a further 17% of variation.
A more transient but none the less important reason for the
species impoverishment of islands, especially remote islands, is the fact that many lack species that they could potentially support, simply because there has been insufﬁcient time for thespecies to colonize. An example is the island of Surtsey, whichemerged in 1963 as a result of a volcanic eruption (Fridriksson,1975). The new island, 40 km southwest of Iceland, was reached
by bacteria and fungi, some seabirds, a ﬂy and the seeds of several beach plants within 6 months of the start of the eruption.Its ﬁrst established vascular plant was recorded in 1965, and theﬁrst moss colony in 1967. By 1973, 13 species of vascular plant andmore than 66 mosses had become established (Figure 21.17).Colonization is continuing still. The general importance of thisexample is that the communities of many islands can be under-stood neither in terms of simple habitat suitability nor as a 
characteristic equilibrium richness. Rather, they stress that manyisland communities have not reached equilibrium and are certainlynot fully ‘saturated’ with species.
21.5.4 Which species? Turnover
MacArthur and Wilson’s equilibrium
theory predicts not only a characteristicspecies richness for an island, but also a turnover of species in which
new species continually colonize whilst others become extinct.This implies a signiﬁcant degree of chance regarding precisely 
which species are present at any one time. However, studies ofturnover itself are rare, because communities have to be followedover a period of time (usually difﬁcult and costly). Good studiesof turnover are rarer still, because it is necessary to count everyspecies on every occasion so as to avoid ‘pseudo-immigrations’Degree of saturation (%)
10,000 6000 20006.25
012.525100
4000
Distance from New Guinea (km)50
8000
Figure 21.15 The number of resident, nonmarine, lowland 
bird species on islands more than 500 km from the larger source
island of New Guinea expressed as a proportion of the number ofspecies on an island of equivalent area but close to New Guinea,and plotted as a function of island distance from New Guinea. 
(After Diamond, 1972.)species turnover . . .bird species richness
on islands decreaseswith ‘remoteness’EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 618••PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 619
and ‘pseudo-extinctions’. Indeed, any results are bound to be 
underestimates of actual turnover, because an observer cannotbe everywhere all the time.
One revealing study involved 
censuses from 1949 to 1975 of the
breeding birds in a small oak wood(Eastern Wood) in southern England. In all, 44 species bred in the wood over this period, and 16 of them bred every year. The number
breeding in any one year varied between 27 and 36, with an average of 32 species. The immigration and extinction ‘curves’are shown in Figure 21.18. Their most obvious feature is the scattering of points as compared with the assumed simplicity ofthe MacArthur–Wilson model. Nevertheless, whilst the positivecorrelation in the extinction graph is statistically insigniﬁcant, thenegative correlation in the immigration graph is highly signiﬁc-ant; and the two lines do seem to cross at roughly 32 species, withthree new immigrants and three extinctions each year. There isclearly a considerable turnover of species, and consequently con-
siderable year-to-year variation in the bird community of EasternWood despite its approximately constant species richness.
In contrast, a long-term study 
(surveys in 1954, 1976 and annuallyfrom 1984 to 1990) of the 15-strong birdcommunity on tropical Guana Island,revealed no such turnover – no new species established and onlyone went extinct, as a result of habitat destruction (Mayer &Chipley, 1992). The position of Guana Island within an archi-
pelago of numerous small islands may reduce the likelihood oflocal extinctions if there is continuous dispersal from island to island. On the other hand, it is conceivable that tropical birds really do have lower turnover rates – because they are more oftensedentary, have lower adult mortality and are more often resident,as opposed to migratory (Mayer & Chipley, 1992).
Experimental evidence of turnover and indeterminacy is 
provided by the work of Simberloff and Wilson (1969), who
exterminated the invertebrate fauna on a series of small mangroveislands in the Florida Keys and monitored recolonization. Withinabout 200 days, species richness had stabilized around the level
••Area (km2)(b)
103060100
1 3 610 30 60100 300 6001000Number of species
1,000,0005
Area (km2)(a)
10501005001000
500,000 100,00050,000 10,0005000 1000500 10050 105
Figure 21.16 Remoteness increases the species impoverishment of islands. (a) A species–area plot for the land birds of individual islands
in tropical and subtropical seas. /H17009, islands more than 300 km from the next largest land mass or the very remote Hawaiian and Galápagos
archipelagos; /H17033, islands less than 300 km from source. (b) Species–area plots in the Azores and the Channel Islands for land and freshwater
breeding birds ( /H17010, Azores; /H17033, Channel Islands) and for native ferns ( 1, Azores; 7, Channel Islands). The Azores are more remote for birds
but not for ferns. (After Williamson, 1981.)
. . . is relatively high
for temperatewoodland birds . . .
Numbe of species70
3050
2060
40
10
1965
Year1973 1967 1969 1971Mosses
Vascular plants
Figure 21.17 The number of species of mosses and vascular
plants recorded on the new island of Surtsey from 1965 to 1973.
(After Fridriksson, 1975.). . . but not for birds
on a tropical islandEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 619620 CHAPTER 21
prior to defaunation, but with many differences in species com-
position. Since then, the rate of turnover of species on the islandshas been estimated as 1.5 extinctions and colonizations per year(Simberloff, 1976).
Thus, the idea that there is a turnover of species leading to 
a characteristic equilibrium richness on islands, but an indeter-
minacy regarding particular species, appears to be correct – at least approximately.
21.5.5 Which species? Disharmony
It has long been recognized – for ex-
ample by Hooker in 1866 – that one ofthe main characteristics of island biotasis ‘disharmony’, that is, the relative pro-portions of different taxa are not the
same on islands as they are on the mainland. We have already seen
from the species–area relationships in Figure 21.16 that groups oforganisms with good powers of dispersal (like ferns and, to a lesserextent, birds) are more likely to colonize remote islands than are
groups with relatively poor powers ofdispersal (most mammals).
However, variation in dispersal
ability is not the only factor leading todisharmony. Species may vary in their risk of extinction. Thus,
species that naturally have low densities per unit area are boundto have only small populations on islands, and a chance ﬂuctua-tion in a small population is quite likely to eliminate it altogether.Vertebrate predators, which generally have relatively small populations, are notable for their absence on many islands. Forexample, the birds on the Atlantic island of Tristan da Cunha have no bird, mammal or reptile predators apart from those released by humans. Specialist predators are also liable to be absent from islands because their immigration can only lead tocolonization if their prey have arrived ﬁrst. Similar arguments apply to parasites, mutualists and so on. In other words, for manyspecies an island is only suitable if some other species is present,and disharmony arises because some types of organism are 
more ‘dependent’ than others.
The development by Diamond
(1975) of incidence functions and assembly
rules for the birds of the Bismark
Archipelago is probably the fullest attempt to understand islandcommunities by combining ideas on dispersal and extinction dif-ferentials with those on sequences of arrival and habitat suitability.Constructing such incidence functions (Figure 21.19) allowedDiamond to contrast ‘supertramp’ species (high rates of dispersalbut a poorly developed ability to persist in communities with manyother species), with ‘high S’ species (only able to persist on large
islands with many other species), and to contrast these in turnwith intermediate categories. Such work illustrates particularly
clearly that it takes far more than a count of the number of speciespresent to characterize the community of an island. Island com-munities are not merely impoverished – the impoverishment affectsparticular types of organism disproportionately.
21.5.6 Which species? Evolution
No aspect of ecology can be fully
understood without reference to evolu-tionary processes taking place overevolutionary timescales, and this isparticularly true for an understanding of
island communities. On isolated islands, the rate at which newspecies evolve may be comparable with or even faster than therate at which they arrive as new colonists. Clearly, the com-munities of many islands will be incompletely understood by reference only to ecological processes.
One widespread illustration of this
is the very common occurrence, espe-cially on ‘oceanic’ islands, of endemic
species (i.e. species that are found
nowhere else). Almost all the species ofDrosophila on Hawaii, for example (see Section 1.4.1), are endemics
(apart from cosmopolitan urban ‘pests’) as are most of the species
•• ••some taxa are better
suited to reachislands and persistthere . . .
. . . or vary in theirrisk of extinctionincidence functionsand assembly rules
evolution rate onislands may be fasterthan colonizationrate
endemism – morelikely on remoteislands (and for poordispersers) . . .Immigrants8
4
26
25
Species breeding45 30 35 400Extinctions8
4
26
25 45 30 35 400
Figure 21.18 Immigration and extinction of breeding birds at
Eastern Wood, UK. The line in the extinction diagram is at 45°.
The line in the immigration diagram is the calculated regressionline with a slope of −0.38. (After Beven, 1976; from Williamson,
1981.)EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 620PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 621
of land birds on the island of Tristan da Cunha. A more com-
plete illustration of the balance between colonization and the evolution of endemics is provided by the animals and plants ofNorfolk Island (Figure 21.20). This small island (about 70 km
2) isapproximately 700 km from New Caledonia and New Zealand,
but about 1200 km from Australia, and the ratio of Australian speciesto New Zealand and New Caledonian species within a group cantherefore be used as a measure of that group’s dispersal ability.
As Figure 21.20 shows, the proportion of endemics on NorfolkIsland is highest in groups with poor dispersal ability and lowestin groups with good dispersal ability.
In a similar vein, Lake Tanganyika,
one of the ancient and deep Great Riftlakes of Africa, contains 214 species of cichlid ﬁsh, many of which showexquisite specializations in the manner and location of their feeding. Of these 214 species, 80% are endemic. With an estimatedage of the lake of 9–12 million years, together with evidence thatthe various endemic groups diverged some 3.5–5 million yearsago, it is likely that this uniquely diverse, endemic ﬁsh fauna evolvedwithin the lake from a single ancestral lineage (Meyer, 1993). By
contrast, Lake Rudolph, which has only been an isolated waterbody for 5000 years, since its connection to the Nile system wasbroken, contains only 37 species of cichlid of which only 16% areendemic (Fryer & Iles, 1972).
21.6 Gradients of species richness
Sections 21.3–21.5 demonstrated how difﬁcult explanations for 
variations in species richness are to formulate and test. It is easier to describe patterns, especially gradients, in species richness.These are discussed next. Explanations for these, too, however,are often very uncertain.
•• ••. . . and in more
ancient ecosystemsJ1.0
0.4
0.20.6
0 140 40 100 1200
S0.8
20 60 80(a)
0 140 40 100 120
S20 60 80(b)
0 140 40 100 120
S20 60 80(c)
Figure 21.19 Incidence functions for various species in the Bismarcks in which J, the proportion of islands occupied by a given 
species, is plotted against S, a measure of island ‘size’ (actually the total number of bird species present). (a) Incidence functions for two
‘supertramps’: /H17033, ﬂycatcher Monarcha cinerascens ; /H17033, honeyeater Myzomela pammelaena. (b) Incidence function for the pigeon Chalcophaps
stephani , a competent colonizer and, apparently, an effective competitor. (c) Incidence functions for three species that are restricted  to
larger islands: /H17033, hawk Henicopernis longicauda ; /H17033, rail Rallina tricolor ; 8, heron Butorides striatus. (After Diamond, 1975.)Index of dispersal ability
60 40 10110
30
Endemics (%)50 20Vagrant moths
Muscidae and Anthomyidae
Herbaceous monocotyledons
Widespread moths
Ferns
Resident Noctuidae
Resident moths
Resident Geometridae Coastal
plantsLand
birds
Forest plantsDicotyledons
Forest moths
CerambycidaeWoody monocotyledons
Figure 21.20 Poorly dispersing groups on Norfolk Island have 
a higher proportion of endemic species, and are more likely to
contain species that have reached Norfolk Island from either New Caledonia or New Zealand than species from Australia,which is further away. The converse holds for good dispersers.
(After Holloway, 1977.)EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 621622 CHAPTER 21
21.6.1 Latitudinal gradients
One of the most widely recognized pat-
terns in species richness is the increasethat occurs from the poles to the tropics.
This can be seen in a wide variety of groups, including trees, marine invertebrates, mammals and lizards (Figure 21.21). The
pattern can be seen, moreover, in terrestrial, marine and fresh-water habitats.
A number of explanations related
to our discussions in Section 21.3 and21.4 have been put forward for thegeneral latitudinal trend in species rich-ness, but not one of these is without
problems. In the ﬁrst place, the richness of tropical communitieshas been attributed to a greater intensity of predation and to more
specialized predators ( Janzen, 1970; Connell, 1971; Clark & Clark,1984). More intense predation could reduce the importance of competition, permitting greater niche overlap and promotinghigher richness (see Figure 21.1c). However, even if predation ismore intense in the tropics, which is far from certain, it cannotreadily be forwarded as the root cause of tropical richness, sincethis begs the question of what gives rise to the richness of the
predators themselves.
Second, increasing species richness
may be related to an increase in pro-ductivity as one moves from the poles to the equator. The lengthof the growing season increases from the poles to the tropics and, on average, there is certainly more heat and more light 
energy in more tropical regions. As discussed in Section 21.3.1,
this can be associated with greater species richness, althoughincreased productivity in at least some cases has been associatedwith reduced richness.
Moreover, light and heat are not
the only determinants of plant pro-ductivity. Tropical soils often havelower concentrations of plant nutrients than temperate soils.
The species-rich tropics might therefore be seen, in this sense, asreﬂecting their low productivity. In fact, tropical soils are poor 
in nutrients because most of the nutrients are locked up in thelarge tropical biomass. A productivity argument might there-fore have to run as follows. The light, temperature and waterregimes of the tropics lead to high biomass communities but not necessarily to diverse communities. This, though, leads to 
•• ••Species richness
Latitude ( °N)100
10 40 50 70 20 30 6040
20(c) Lizards
06080Species richness
Latitude (degrees)(a) Marine bivalves
500
400300200100
090 70 50 30 10 10 30 50 70 90
NS
Latitude (degrees)(b) Butterflies
020406080
70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 10 20 30 40 50
NS(d) Trees
Latitude ( °N)160
120
80
40
025 35 45 55 65 75Figure 21.21 Latitudinal patterns in
species richness in: (a) marine bivalves
(after Flessa & Jablonski, 1995); (b) swallowtail butterﬂies (after Sutton & Collins, 1991); (c) quadruped mammals
in North America (after Rosenzweig &Sandlin 1997); and (d) trees in NorthAmerica (after Currie & Paquin, 1987.)
richness decreases
with latitude
a diversity ofexplanations:predation, . . .. . . productivity, . . .
. . . nutrient supply, . . .EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 622PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 623
nutrient-poor soils and perhaps a wide range of light regimes 
from the forest ﬂoor to the canopy far above. These in turn leadto high plant species richness and thus to high animal species richness. There is certainly no simple ‘productivity explanation’
for the latitudinal trend in richness.
Some ecologists have invoked the 
climate of low latitudes as a reason for
their high species richness. Speciﬁcally,
equatorial regions are generally less seasonal than temperateregions, and this may allow species to be more specialized (i.e.have narrower niches, see Figure 21.1b). The greater evolutionary‘age’ of the tropics has also been proposed as a reason for theirgreater species richness (Flenley, 1993), and another line of argu-ment suggests that the repeated fragmentation and coalescence
of tropical forest refugia promoted genetic differentiation and speciation, accounting for much of the high richness in tropicalregions (Connor, 1986). These ideas, too, are plausible but veryfar from proven.
A ﬁnal idea, the area hypothesis of
Terborgh (1973), is worth highlighting.The area of the tropical zone is much
greater than that of the other latitudinal zones, and Rosenzweig(2003) has claimed that more area means more species. Note that in such enormous geographic areas the focus is not on a balance between immigration and extinction (as it was for islandsin Section 21.5.1) but between speciation and extinction. Speciesinhabiting more extensive regions (i.e. tropical species) can, in 
consequence, have larger geographic ranges. Rosenzweig (2003)argues that species with larger ranges (and consequently largerpopulation sizes) are both less likely to go extinct (see Section 7.5)and more likely to speciate (allopatrically, because of a greaterlikelihood that their range will be bisected by a barrier). If it istrue that extinction rates are lower and speciation rates are higherin regions of greater spatial extent, such regions should also havehigher equilibrium species richnesses. However, the evidence forthe underlying assumptions is scant.
Overall, therefore, the latitudinal gradient lacks an unambigu-
ous explanation. This is hardly surprising. The components of a possible explanation – trends with area, productivity, climaticstability and so on – are themselves understood only in anincomplete and rudimentary way, and the latitudinal gradient intertwines these components with one another, and with other,often opposing forces: isolation, harshness and so on.
21.6.2 Gradients with altitude and depth
A decrease in species richness with 
altitude, analogous to that observedwith latitude, has frequently beenreported in terrestrial environments(e.g. Figure 21.22a, b). On the otherhand, some have reported a monotonic increase with altitude 
(e.g. Figure 21.22c) while about half the studies of altitudinal speciesrichness have described hump-shaped patterns (e.g. Figure 21.22d)(Rahbek, 1995).
•• ••. . . climate . . .
. . . or area?
decreasing, increasing
or hump-shapedrichness relationshipswith altitude(a)
Altitude (m)Number of species140
1500 1900 2100 2300 2500(b)
17000120
100
80
6040
20
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Altitude (m)Number of species14(c)
012
10
86
42
500
1000
40002000
5000
6000
Altitude (m)Species richness1200(d)
01000
800
600
400200
3000500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
5500
6000
6500
7000
7500
8000Species richness
Altitude (m)0100200300400
Vines
Shrubs
Herbs
TreesEpiphytes
Figure 21.22 Relationships between species richness and 
altitude for: (a) breeding birds in the Nepalese Himalayas 
(after Hunter & Yonzon, 1992); (b) plants in the Sierra Manantlán,Mexico (after Vázquez & Givnish, 1998); (c) ants in Lee Canyon in the Spring Mountains of Nevada, USA (after Sanders et al. ,
2003); and (d) ﬂowering plants in the Nepalese Himalayas 
(after Grytnes & Vetaas, 2002).EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 623624 CHAPTER 21
At least some of the factors instru-
mental in the latitudinal trend in 
richness are also likely to be important as explanations for altitudinal trends
(although the problems in explaining the latitudinal trend apply
equally to altitude). Thus, high-altitude communities almost invari-ably occupy smaller areas than those in lowlands at equivalentlatitudes, and they will usually be more isolated from similar com-munities than in lowland sites. Therefore the effects of area andisolation are likely to contribute to observed decreases in speciesrichness with altitude. In addition, declines in species richness have often been explained in terms of decreasing productivity associated with lower temperatures and shorter growing seasonsat higher altitude, or physiological stress associated with climatic
extremes near mountain tops. Indeed, the explanation for the converse, positive relationship between ant diversity and altitudein Figure 21.22c, is that precipitation increased with altitude inthis case, resulting in higher productivity and less physiologicallyextreme conditions at higher altitude.
The concept of ‘hard boundaries’
provides the basis for a hypothesis to explain hump-shaped relationships(Colwell & Hurtt, 1994). This nullmodel approach assumes the random
placement of species between an upper hard boundary (moun-tain top) and a lower hard boundary (valley bottom) and predictsa symmetric humped relationship in the middle of the gradient
(which tapers most steeply as the boundaries are approached).Grytnes and Vetaas (2002) modeled the altitudinal pattern inHimalayan ﬂowering plants and found that the actual distribution(Figure 21.22d) ﬁtted best to a model combining hard boundarieswith an underlying monotonic decline in richness with altitude.In a revealing study of altitudinal transects in Norway, Grytnes
(2003) reported a variety of patterns in vascular plant richness.
The most northerly of the transects, at Lynghaugtinden, showeda monotonic decline, conforming best to the hypothesis relatingdeclining area to increasing altitude (Figure 21.23a). Tronfjellet,
on the other hand, had a pattern broadly consistent with the hard boundary hypothesis, peaking in richness in the middle ofthe altitudinal range and with steep declines near the boundaries(Figure 21.23b). Enriching the picture even further, Gråheivarden,the most southerly transect, revealed a pattern consistent with athird, ‘mass effect’ hypothesis. This concerns the establishmentof species in sites where a self-maintaining population could notexist, via a spilling over of taxa from an adjacent biotic zone. TheGråheivarden transect supported the mass effect prediction of
increased species richness near the treeline, where forest and alpinecommunities abut (Figure 21.23c).
In aquatic environments, the change
in species richness with depth showsstrong similarities to the terrestrial gradient with altitude. In larger lakes, the
cold, dark, oxygen-poor abyssal depths contain fewer species thanthe shallow surface waters. Likewise, in marine habitats, plants areconﬁned to the photic zone (where they can photosynthesize), whichrarely extends below 30 m. In the open ocean, therefore, there is arapid decrease in richness with depth, reversed only by the varietyof often bizarre animals living on the ocean ﬂoor. Interestingly,however, in coastal regions the effect of depth on the species 
richness of benthic (bottom-dwelling) animals produces a peak of richness at about 1000 m, possibly reﬂecting higher environmentalpredictability there (Figure 21.24). At greater depths, beyond thecontinental slope, species richness declines again, probably becauseof the extreme paucity of food resources in abyssal regions.
•• ••Species richness30
15
1020
0 500 2000
Altitude (m)25
100 300 400
Species richness25
15
1020
6000
Altitude (m)400 800 1000Species richness50
20
1030
1400 16000
Altitude (m)40
600 1000 1200*Lynghaugtinden
800* *Tronfjellet Gråheivarden (a) (c) (b)
Figure 21.23 Scatter plots of species richness in relation to altitude for three transects in Norway. In each case the treeline is shown 
as a dashed line and the midpoint of the transect as an asterisk. (a) Lynghaugtinden shows a monotonic decline in richness with  altitude.
(b) Tronfjellet shows a hump-shaped pattern with its peak near the midpoint of the transect. (c) Gråheivarden shows an increase  in
richness just above the treeline followed by a decline towards the mountain top. (After Grytnes, 2003.)
again, a diversity 
of potentialexplanations
patterns with depth inaquatic environments
‘hard boundaries’and hump-shapedrelationshipsEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 624PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 625
21.6.3 Gradients during community succession
We saw earlier (see, for example, 
Section 16.7.1) how, in communitysuccessions, if they run their fullcourse, the number of species ﬁrst
increases (because of colonization) but eventually decreases
(because of competition). This is most ﬁrmly established forplants, but the few studies that have been carried out on animalsin successions indicate, at least, a parallel increase in species richness in the early stages of succession. Figure 21.25 illustrates
this for birds following shifting cultivation in a tropical rain-forest in northeast India, and for insects associated with old-ﬁeldsuccessions.
To a certain extent, the successional gradient is a necessary
consequence of the gradual colonization of an area by species from surrounding communities that are at later successionalstages; that is, later stages are more fully saturated with species(see Figure 21.1d). However, this is a small part of the story, since
succession involves a process of replacement of species and notjust the mere addition of new ones.
Indeed, as with the other gradients
in species richness, there is somethingof a cascade effect with succession: oneprocess that increases richness kick-starts a second, which feedsinto a third, and so on. The earliest species will be those that arethe best colonizers and the best competitors for open space. Theyimmediately provide resources (and introduce heterogeneity)
that were not previously present. For example, the earliest plantsgenerate resource-depletion zones in the soil that inevitablyincrease the spatial heterogeneity of plant nutrients. The plantsthemselves provide a new variety of microhabitats, and for theanimals that might feed on them they provide a much greaterrange of food resources (see Figure 21.1a). The increase in herbivory and predation may then feed back to promote furtherincreases in species richness (predator-mediated coexistence: 
see Figure 21.1c), which provides further resources and more heterogeneity, and so on. In addition, temperature, humidity andwind speed are much less variable (over time) within a forest than
•• ••a hump-shaped
richness relationshipduring succession . . .. . . caused by acascade of effects?0
1
2
3
450 40 80 100Number of speciesDepth (km)
Figure 21.24 Depth gradient in species richness of the
megabenthos (ﬁsh, decapods, holothurians and asteroids) 
in the ocean southwest of Ireland. (After Angel, 1994.)
Bird species richness per transect
Succession25
2015
10
5
Hemipterous insect species richness
20100
90
80
70
605040
30
2010
0(b)
01 0 6 0 40 50 30 0(a)
Total Hemiptera
HomopteraHeteroptera
Years since abandonment of old field
1-year fallow 5-year fallow10-year fallow 25-year fallow 100-year fallow Primary forestFigure 21.25 The increase in species
richness during successions. (a) Birds
following shifting cultivation in a tropicalrainforest in northeast India. (After ShankarRaman et al. , 1998.) (b) Hemipterous
insects following an old-ﬁeld succession.
(After Brown & Southwood, 1983.)EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 625626 CHAPTER 21
in an exposed early successional stage, and the enhanced constancy
of the environment may provide a stability of conditions andresources that permits specialist species to build up populationsand persist (see Figure 21.1b). As with the other gradients, theinteraction of many factors makes it difﬁcult to disentangle cause
from effect. But with the successional gradient of richness, thetangled web of cause and effect appears to be of the essence.
21.6.4 Patterns in taxon richness in the fossil record
Finally, it is of interest to take the processes that are believed to
be instrumental in generating present-day gradients in richnessand apply them to trends occurring over much longer timespans.The imperfection of the fossil record has always been the greatestimpediment to the paleontological study of evolution. Neverthe-
less, some general patterns have emerged, and our knowledge ofsix important groups of organisms is summarized in Figure 21.26.Until about 600 million years ago, 
the world was populated virtually only by bacteria and algae, but then almost all the phyla of marine invertebratesentered the fossil record within thespace of only a few million years (Figure 21.26a). Given that the introduction of a higher trophic level can increase richness at a lower level, it can be argued that the ﬁrst single-celled 
herbivorous protist was probably instrumental in the Cambrianexplosion in species richness. The opening up of space by crop-ping of the algal monoculture, coupled with the availability ofrecently evolved eukaryotic cells, may have caused the biggestburst of evolutionary diversiﬁcation in earth’s history. Since thattime, taxonomic richness has increased steadily but erratically(Figure 21.26a), with ﬁve so-called mass extinctions and manysmaller ones. Analysis of the pattern of ‘recovery’ peaks follow-
ing extinction peaks indicates that the average recovery time is10 million years (Kirchner & Weil, 2000).
•• ••400
300200100
600 400 200 0Families(a) Shallow-water marine invertebrates
Orders or major suborders(b) Vascular land plants
Maximum estimate
Minimum
estimate
(d) Amphibians (f) Mammals
Synapsid
groups
Geological time (million years before present)Therian
groupsA BCD600
400200
0
400Species
200 0Cam O S D Carb P Tri J K Tert(c) InsectsFamilies
400 200 0Families
D Carb P Tri J K Tert
400 200 0Carb P Tri J K Tert SD
Tri J K Tert P CarbD Tri J K Tert P CarbD
400 200 0Carb P Tri J K Tert D
400 200 00 0
(e) Reptiles
Families12
10
864
2
60
5040302010
060
5040302010
0605040302010
0A  Early vascular plants
B  PteridophytesC  Gymnosperms
D  Angiosperms
Figure 21.26 Curves showing patterns in taxon richness through the fossil record. (a) Families of shallow-water invertebrates. (After
Valentine, 1970.) (b) Species of vascular land plants in four groups: early vascular plants, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and ang iosperms.
(After Niklas et al. , 1983.) (c) Major orders and suborders of insects. The minimum values are derived from deﬁnite fossil records; the
maximum values include ‘possible’ records. (From Strong et al. , 1984.) (d–f ) Vertebrate families of amphibians, reptiles and mammals,
respectively. (After Webb, 1987.) Key to geological periods: Cam, Cambrian; O, Ordovician; S, Silurian; D, Devonian; Carb, Carb oniferous;
P, Permian; Tri, Triassic; J, Jurassic; K, Cretaceous; Tert, Tertiary.Cambrian explosion:
exploiter-mediatedcoexistence?EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 626PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 627
The dramatic decline in the number
of families of shallow-water inverte-
brates as a result of the mass extinctionat the end of the Permian (Figure 21.26a)
could have been a result of the coalescence of the earth’s contin-
ents to produce the single supercontinent of Pangaea. The joiningof the continents produced a marked reduction in the area occupiedby shallow seas (which occur around the periphery of continents)
and thus a marked decline in the area of habitat available to shallow-water invertebrates. Moreover, at this time the world wassubject to a prolonged period of global cooling in which huge quantities of water were locked up in enlarged polar caps andglaciers, causing a widespread reduction of warm shallow sea environments. Thus, a species–area relationship may be invoked
to account for the reduction in richness of this fauna. In a relatedcontext, Rosenzweig (2003) reports a signiﬁcant positive rela-tionship when the number of fossil plant species of the northern hemisphere from various periods in the earth’s history is plottedagainst the total area of the land mass during the period in question(11 periods with nonoverlapping lists of fossil species).
The analysis of fossil remains of vas-
cular land plants (Figure 21.26b) revealsfour distinct evolutionary phases: (i) aSilurian–mid-Devonian proliferation ofearly vascular plants; (ii) a subsequentLate Devonian–Carboniferous radiation
of fern-like lineages; (iii) the appearance of seed plants in the late
Devonian and the adaptive radiation to a gymnosperm-dominatedﬂora; and (iv) the appearance and rise of the ﬂowering plants(angiosperms) in the Cretaceous and Tertiary. It seems that afteran initial invasion of the land, made possible by the appearanceof roots, the diversiﬁcation of each plant group coincided with a decline in species numbers of the previously dominant group.In two of the transitions (early plants to gymnosperms, and gymnosperms to angiosperms), this pattern may reﬂect the com-petitive displacement of older, less specialized taxa by newer andpresumably more specialized taxa.
The ﬁrst undoubtedly phytophag-
ous insects are known from the Car-boniferous. Thereafter, modern ordersappeared steadily (Figure 21.26c) withthe Lepidoptera (butterﬂies and moths)
arriving last on the scene, at the same time as the rise of theangiosperms. Reciprocal evolution and counterevolution betweenplants and herbivorous insects has almost certainly been, and still is,an important mechanism driving the increase in richness observedin both land plants and insects through their evolution.
Toward the end of the last ice age,
the continents were much richer in largeanimals than they are today. For example,Australia was home to many genera ofgiant marsupials; North America had itsmammoths, giant ground sloths, and more than 70 other genera
of large mammals; and New Zealand and Madagascar were hometo giant ﬂightless birds, the moas (Dinorthidae) and elephant bird(Aepyornis ), respectively. Over the past 50,000 years or so, a major
loss of this biotic diversity has occurred over much of the globe.
The extinctions particularly affected large terrestrial animals(Figure 21.27a); they were more pronounced in some parts of theworld than others; and they occurred at different times in differ-ent places (Figure 21.27b). The extinctions broadly mirror patternsof human migration. Thus, the arrival in Australia of ancestralaborigines occurred 40,000 or more years ago; stone spear pointsbecame abundant throughout the United States about 11,500 yearsago; and humans have been in both Madagascar and New Zealandfor about 1000 years. It seems likely, therefore, that the arrival of
efﬁcient human hunters led to the rapid overexploitation of vulner-able and proﬁtable large prey. Africa, where humans originated,shows much less evidence of loss, perhaps because coevolutionof large animals alongside early humans provided ample time forthem to develop effective defenses (Owen-Smith, 1987).
The Pleistocene extinctions herald the modern age, in which
the inﬂuence upon natural communities of human activities hasbeen increasing dramatically (see Chapters 7, 15 and 22).
21.7 Species richness and ecosystem functioning
In this penultimate chapter section,
rather than seeking to discern andexplain patterns in species richness we switch focus to address the conse-quences of variations in species richness
for ecosystem functioning. Speciﬁcally, we deal with productiv-ity, decomposition and the ﬂux of nutrients and water (discussedmore fully in Chapters 11, 17 and 18). Understanding the role ofbiodiversity in ecosystem processes is important both for funda-mental and practical reasons, because it has implications for howhumans respond to biodiversity loss. We have already discussedthe effects of richness on the stability of ecosystem functioning(see Section 20.3.6). Here we present examples of studies fromvarious ecosystem types that reveal relationships between species
richness and the ecosystem processes themselves, before proceedingto consider several hypotheses to account for such relationships.
21.7.1 Positive relationships between species richness
and ecosystem functioning
As part of an international research
effort, standard protocols were used ateight European ﬁeld sites to investig-ate the effect of reduction in grasslandspecies richness on primary productivity
•• ••Permian decline: 
a species–arearelationship?
competitivedisplacement amongthe major plantgroups?
coevolution as adriver of richnessincrease?
extinctions of largeanimals: prehistoricoverexploitation?switching focus: howdoes species richnessinﬂuence ecosystemfunctioning?
increased speciesrichness resulting i n.... . . higherproductivity, . . .EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 627628 CHAPTER 21
(measured as accumulation of above-ground biomass) by syn-
thesizing grassland communities with different numbers of speciesof grasses, nitrogen-ﬁxing legumes and other herbaceous species(herbs). While the detailed results differed among sites, there wasan overall log-linear reduction of average productivity with loss
of species (Figure 21.28a). For a given species richness, there wasalso a decline in productivity with a reduction in the number offunctional groups (grasses, legumes, herbs) (Figure 21.28b).
Jonsson and Malmqvist (2000) 
studied the effect on decomposition ofspecies richness of the larvae of threestoneﬂy species that feed on tree leaves
falling into streams. Every replicate had 12 stoneﬂy larvae present– 12 of one species, six of each of two species, or four of each of
three species (with 10 replicates of all possible combinations). The rate of loss of leaf mass during a 46-day mesocosm experi-ment was positively related to species richness (Figure 21.28c).
The microbial decomposition of
soil organic matter releases ammo-nium ions (nitrogen mineralization).Seven years after commencing a replicated manipulation of
grassland species richness in Minnesota, USA, Zak et al. (2003) 
found that mineralization rates in soil samples were positivelyrelated to plant species richness (Figure 21.28d). Nutrient ﬂux was also found to be related to species richness of submersed 
macrophytes in mesocosms simulating wetland communities – the uptake of phosphorus by algae growing on the surface of themacrophytes was greater (and total phosphorus loss from the mesocosms was reduced) when more macrophytes were present(Figure 21.28e).
21.7.2 Contrasting explanations for richness–ecosystem
process relationships
In an intense and sometimes acrimoni-
ous debate (Kaiser, 2000; Loreau et al. ,
2001), three principal hypotheses havebeen advanced to account for positiverelationships between species richness and ecosystem functioning.
•• ••Generic extinctions (%)
Body mass range (kg) Years agoAfrica
Australia
North America
Madagascar–New Zealand
100,000 10,000 1000100,000 10,000 1000
100100100,000 10,000 1000 100100,000 10,000 1000 100
100
50
0 Survival (%)(b)
0.01–5 5–100 100–1000 1000+76100
41
1.3100
80
60
40
20
0100
50
0100
50
0100
50
0(a)
Figure 21.27 (a) The percentage of genera of large mammalian herbivores that have gone extinct in the last 130,000 years is strongly 
size dependent (data from North and South America, Europe and Australia combined). (After Owen-Smith, 1987.) (b) Percentage sur vival
of large animals on three continents and two large islands (New Zealand and Madagascar). (After Martin, 1984.)
. . . faster
decomposition . . .
contrastinghypotheses
. . . and reducednutrient lossEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 628PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 629
On one hand, if species show niche
differentiation (see Chapter 8) they may
use resources in complementary ways, utilizing a greater propor-
tion of available resources (see Figure 21.1d) and contributing to a higher level of ecosystem productivity (or decomposition 
or nutrient cycling). This is the complementarity hypothesis .
A second idea, the facilitation hypo-
thesis , recognizes that some species may
have positive effects on the ecosystemrole played by other species. For exam-ple, some submersed wetland macro-phytes facilitate colonization by algaemore than others do (Figure 21.28d)(Engelhardt & Ritchie, 2002).
Both the complementarity and
facilitation hypotheses predict ‘over-yielding’, where productivity or decomposition rates in multi-
species communities are faster than in communities with fewerspecies. As long as either of these hypotheses applies, a case canbe made for the need for management to conserve biodiversityto maintain ecosystem functioning.
On the other hand, it may be that
positive relationships between richness
and functioning are artefacts of thespecies that happen to be assembledtogether in experiments. The so-called sampling effect hypothesis
suggests that the more species are present in an assemblage, the more likely it is to contain, by chance, a highly competitiveor productive species. Thus, species-rich communities may on average be more productive because they are more likely to 
contain an especially productive species. In this case, overyield-ing will not be seen (a monoculture of the productive species will
•• ••
Above-ground biomass (g m–2)
1601500(a)
1000
500
32 8 4 1 2
Decreasing species richness (log2 scale)SwedenPortugalSwitzerlandUKIrelandGermany
Greece
Above-ground biomass (g m–2)
2300800(b)
600
500
31
Decreasing functional group richness4 species
2 species8 species700
400
100.70.91.31.5
1.1
52 0Gross N mineralization
(µg N g−1 day−1)(d)
01 5
Number of species20.000.020.080.10
0.04
1Total P loss (mg l−1)(e)
30.06
Number of speciesLeaf mass loss (g treatment–1)
0.00.10.30.5(c)
0.4
0.2
13 2
Number of species
Figure 21.28 (a) Primary productivity (measured as above-ground biomass accumulation after 2 years) versus species richness in a 
large number of simulated grassland assemblages across Europe (regression lines are shown for each country). (After Hector et al., 
1999.) (b) Primary productivity versus functional group richness in the European grasslands combined. (After Hector et al. , 1999.) 
(c) Decomposition rate (loss of leaf mass) versus number of stream-dwelling shredding stoneﬂy species present. (After Jonsson &
Malmqvist, 2000.) (d) Gross nitrogen mineralization (per gram of soil) versus plant species richness in a 7-year grassland mani pulation.
(After Zak et al. , 2003.) (e) Rate of loss of phosphorus from mesocosms containing one, two or three submersed macrophyte species,
simulating wetland communities. (After Engelhardt & Ritchie, 2002.)
complementarity . . .
. . . and 
facilitation . . .
...p r e d i c t‘overyielding’ andpoint to the value of conservingbiodiversity . . .. . . but the samplingeffect hypothesisdoes notEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 629630 CHAPTER 21
be no less productive than a multispecies community containing
it) and there will be no case for conserving biodiversity per se to
maintain ecosystem functioning.
The multinational study of Hector
et al. (1999) produced results con-
sistent with the complementarity hypo-
thesis because grassland productivitywas greater when more functional plant
types were present, something that is likely to be a reﬂection ofniche differentiation. However, the work was criticized becauseof a failure to test properly for overyielding and because at least some of the observed patterns could be due to a samplingeffect of whether the nitrogen-ﬁxing legume Trifolium pratense 
happened to be in the mix (Kaiser, 2000). In a much smaller scale
greenhouse experiment, Mikola et al. (2002) used two different
experimental designs. In the ﬁrst, like Hector et al. (2002), they
selected plant species at random from a pool to produce a rangeof richnesses (richness design). In the second, richness levelsincluded deliberately replicated monocultures, bicultures, tri-cultures and six-species mixes (richness and composition design). In both cases, there was a positive relationship between richnessand productivity (total shoot mass); but whereas in the rich-ness design 34% of total variation in productivity was explained by species richness, in the richness and composition design, thisonly explained 16% of variation. Mikola et al. (2002) found no 
evidence of overyielding and, moreover, noted from the secondexperimental design that productivity was greatly affected by 
the presence of one species, Trifolium hybridum , another nitrogen-
ﬁxing legume. Both observations are consistent with the samplingeffect hypothesis.
However, in another ﬁeld-scale
experiment, designed so that the mostproductive monocultures could becompared with multispecies plots that
included the most productive species, Tilman et al. (2001) gathered
evidence of overyielding, ﬁnding that many high-richness plots hadgreater productivity that the single best-performing monoculture.Moreover, there was clearly ‘overyielding’ of decomposition whenmore stoneﬂy species were present in Jonsson and Malmqvist’s(2000) stream experiment (see Figure 21.28c).
It is clear that the results of a range of experimental manip-
ulations of species richness differ in the extent to which the threehypotheses apply, and it should be noted that these are by no means mutually exclusive. As further studies accumulate, gener-alizations can be expected to emerge. For example, it may be thatcomplementarity will be most prominent in situations where niche differentiation is most marked.
In the studies discussed above, the
emphasis has been on manipulating therichness of a single trophic level (plantsor detritivores). In contrast, Downingand Leibold (2002) investigated theeffect on ecosystem processes of changes in species richness across
trophic levels (one, three or ﬁve species in each of three groups– macrophytes, benthic grazers and invertebrate predators – inﬁeld mesocosms mimicking ponds). They aimed to disentangle theeffects of species richness from species composition (the sampling
effect) by nesting and replicating seven particular combinations ofspecies within each richness level. Ecosystem productivity (mainlyby periphyton, phytoplankton and microorganisms) was signiﬁc-antly greater at the highest richness level than at the two lowerones; ecosystem respiration showed a similar but nonsigniﬁcantpattern; while decomposition (weight loss of tree leaves) was notrelated to richness. The effect of species composition on the eco-system processes was at least as statistically signiﬁcant as that ofspecies richness (Figure 21.29) (Downing & Leibold, 2002).
Taken overall, the consequences of
the on-going loss of biodiversity can be
expected to be complex and difﬁcult topredict unless compositional changes arealso accounted for, and this will beparticularly so in the context of whole food webs. Paradoxically,however, while biodiversity is generally declining globally, localbiodiversity is commonly increasing because of the arrival of
invaders (Sax & Gaines, 2003). Thus, a more meaningful objec-
tive will in many cases be to determine the consequences for eco-
system processes of increased local biodiversity.
21.8 Appraisal of patterns in species richness
There are many generalizations that can
be made about the species richness ofcommunities. We have seen how rich-ness may peak at intermediate levels ofavailable environmental energy or of disturbance frequency, and
how richness declines with a reduction in island area or an increasein island remoteness. We ﬁnd also that species richness decreaseswith increasing latitude, and declines or shows a hump-backedrelationship with altitude or depth in the ocean. It increases with a rise in spatial heterogeneity but may decrease with anincrease in temporal heterogeneity (increased climatic variation).It increases, at least initially, during the course of succession andwith the passage of evolutionary time. However, for many of thesegeneralizations important exceptions can be found, and for most
of them the current explanations are not entirely adequate.
The results of descriptive surveys
of species richness may, at ﬁrst glance,seem at odds with the outcomes ofexperimental manipulations. Manyexperiments, for example, have shownthat increasing the number of speciesleads to more productivity (see Sec-tion 21.7). On the other hand, we saw in Section 21.3.1 that 
•• ••some studies have
not revealedoveryielding . . .
. . . while otherstudies have
a tri-trophic levelexperiment showingoveryieldingpractical importanceof biodiversity loss(or gain?)
richness patterns:generalizations andexceptions
bidirectionalrelationships betweenrichness andecosystemcharacteristicsEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 630PATTERNS IN SPECIES RICHNESS 631
more productive environments may contain more or fewer
species than unproductive environments. It is important tounderstand that relationships such as these are bidirectional;changes in biodiversity can be both a cause and a consequenceof changes in productivity (Worm & Duffy, 2003), further com-
plicating the picture.
Unraveling richness patterns is one
of the most difﬁcult and challengingareas of modern ecology. No singlemechanism is likely to adequatelyexplain a particular pattern, and pat-terns at local scales are likely to be
inﬂuenced by processes operating at both local and regional scales.Clear, unambiguous predictions and tests of ideas are often verydifﬁcult to devise and will require great ingenuity of future 
generations of ecologists. Because of the increasing importanceof recognizing and conserving the world’s biodiversity, though,it is crucial that we come to understand thoroughly these patternsin species richness. We assess the adverse effects of human activ-
ities, and how they may be remedied, in Chapter 22.
Summary
Why do some communities contain more species than others? 
Are there patterns or gradients of species richness? If so, what arethe reasons for these patterns? There are plausible answers to thequestions we ask, but these answers are by no means conclusive.
•• ••
Productivity (mg O2 h–1)
160.160.30(a)
0.24
0.20
10 18 42 1 120.28
82 0 14 26 1 7 11 19 51 3 91 5 37 1Respiration (mg O2 h–1)
160.120.24(b)
0.160.20
10 18 42 1 12 82 0 14 26 1 7 11 19 51 3 91 5 37 1Decomposition (g day–1)
160.030.06(c)
0.04
10 18 42 1 12
Composition0.05
82 0 14 26 1 7 11 19 51 3 91 5 37 1Figure 21.29 The response of 
(a) ecosystem productivity, (b) ecosystem
respiration and (c) decomposition tospecies composition nested in speciesrichness. Cases 1–7 are unique species
combinations at low richness (one specieseach of macrophyte, benthic grazer and invertebrate predator), 8–14 atintermediate richness (three species of each group) and 15–21 at high richness(ﬁve species of each group). Averageproductivity was signiﬁcantly higher in thehigh richness case (the dotted lines showthe overall means for richness classes) but
there were no signiﬁcant richness effects on respiration or decomposition. Thevariability within richness classes revealsthe strong effect of species composition on all the ecosystem processes. (After Downing & Leibold, 2002.)
the pressing need 
to understandbiodiversity and itssigniﬁcanceEIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 631632 CHAPTER 21
In simple terms, the number of species that can be packed into
a community is determined by the size of the realized niches 
and the extent to which they overlap, in relation to the range ofavailable resources. Competition and predation can modify theoutcome in predictable ways. In addition, a community will con-
tain more species the more fully saturated it is; a phenomenonthat can be addressed by plotting the relationship between localdiversity and regional diversity (the number of species that couldtheoretically colonize).
We describe the inﬂuence on species richness of a range 
of spatially varying factors (productivity, spatial heterogeneity, environmental harshness) and temporally varying factors (climatic variation, environmental age, habitat area) and describepatterns of richness that increase, decrease or show hump-backed
relationships with these factors. Interactions among factors (e.g. productivity with grazing or disturbance) are frequentlyinvolved in determining patterns. We pay particular attention 
to island biogeography theory and the interaction betweenimmigration and extinction rates in determining species richness– in relation to island area and remoteness.
Next we turn to gradients in species richness, drawing on 
examples relating to latitude, altitude, depth, succession and 
evolutionary history. Explanations for these patterns invoke allthe factors discussed earlier.
In the ﬁnal section, rather than seeking to discern and 
explain patterns in species richness we switch focus to address the consequences of variations in species richness for ecosystemfunctioning, discussing productivity, decomposition and the ﬂuxof nutrients in turn. Understanding the role of biodiversity in eco-system processes is important for practical reasons, because it 
has implications for how humans should respond to biodiversityloss.
••EIPC21  10/24/05  2:19 PM  Page 632••22.1 Introduction
This is the last of the trilogy of chapters dealing with the applica-
tion of ecological theory. In the ﬁrst, Chapter 7, we consideredhow our understanding at the level of individual organisms and of single populations – related to niche theory, life historytheory, dispersal behavior and intraspeciﬁc competition – can 
provide solutions to a multitude of practical problems. The second, Chapter 15, used the theory of the dynamics of interact-ing populations to guide the control of pests and the sustainableharvesting of wild populations. This ﬁnal synthesis recognizes that individuals and populations exist in a web of species inter-actions embedded in a network of energy and nutrient ﬂows. Thus, we deal with the application of theory related to succes-sion (Chapter 16), food webs and ecosystem functioning(Chapters 17–20) and biodiversity (Chapter 21).
Community composition is hardly
ever static and, as we saw in Chapter 16,
some temporal patterns are quite pre-dictable. Management objectives, on theother hand, often seem to require stasis
– the annual production of an agricultural crop, the restorationof a particular combination of species or the long-term survivalof an endangered species. Management will sometimes be ineffective in these situations if managers fail to take into accountunderlying successional processes (see Section 22.2).
We turn to the application of theory about food webs and
ecosystem functioning in Section 22.3. Every species of concernto managers has its complement of competitors, mutualists,
predators and parasites, and an appreciation of such complex interactions is often needed to guide management action (seeSection 22.3.1). Farmers seek to maximize economic returns by manipulating ecosystems with irrigation and by applying fertilizers. But nutrient runoff from farm land, together withtreated or untreated human sewage, can upset the functioning 
of aquatic ecosystems through the process of cultural eutro-
phication (nutrient enrichment), increasing productivity, chan-ging abiotic conditions and altering species composition. Our understanding of lake ecosystem functioning has provided guide-lines for ‘biomanipulation’ of lake food webs to reverse some of the adverse effects of human activities (see Section 22.3.2).Moreover, knowledge of terrestrial ecosystem functioning can help determine optimal farm practices, where crop productivity
involves minimal input of nutrients (see Section 22.3.3). The setting of ecosystem restoration objectives (and the ability to monitor whether these are achieved) requires the developmentof tools to measure ‘ecosystem health’, a topic we deal with inSection 22.3.4.
So much of the planet’s surface is used for, or adversely
affected by, human habitation, industry, mining, food produc-tion and harvesting, that one of our most pressing needs is to plan and set aside networks of reserved land. The augmentationof existing reserves by further areas needs to be done in a sys-tematic way to ensure that biodiversity objectives are achieved atminimal cost (because resources are always limited). Section 22.4describes how our knowledge of patterns of species richness (see
application of
community andecosystem theory
Chapter 22
Ecological Applications at
the Level of Communitiesand Ecosystems:Management Based on the Theory of Succession,
Food Webs, EcosystemFunctioning and BiodiversityEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 633634 CHAPTER 22
Chapter 21) can be used to design networks of reserves, whether
speciﬁcally for conservation (see Section 22.4.1) or for multipleuses, such as harvesting, tourism and conservation combined (see Section 22.4.2).
Finally, in Section 22.5 we deal with
a reality that applied ecologists cannot
ignore. The application of ecologicaltheory never proceeds in isolation.First, there are inevitably economicconsiderations – how can farmers maximize production while minimizing
costs and adverse ecological consequences; how can we set eco-nomic values for biodiversity and ecosystem functioning so thatthese can be evaluated alongside proﬁts from forestry or mining;
how can returns be maximized from the limited funds availablefor conservation? These issues are discussed in Section 22.5.1.Second, there are almost always sociopolitical considerations(see Section 22.5.2) – what methods can be used to reconcile thedesires of all interested parties, from farmers and harvesters totourism operators and conservationists; should the require-ments for sustainable management be set in law or encouragedby education; how can the needs and perspectives of indigenous people be taken into account? These issues come together in theso-called triple bottom line of sustainability, with its ecological,economic and sociopolitical perspectives (see Section 22.5.3).22.2 Succession and management
22.2.1 Managing succession in agroecosystems
Gardeners and farmers alike devote
considerable effort to ﬁghting succes-sion by planting desired species andweeding out unwanted competitors.In an attempt to maintain the characteristics of an early succes-
sional stage – growing a highly productive annual grass – arablefarmers are forced to resist the natural succession to herbaceousperennials (and beyond, to shrubs and trees; see Section 16.4.5).Menalled et al. (2001) compared the impact of four agricultural
management systems on the weed communities that developedin Michigan, USA, over a period of 6 years (consisting of two rotations from corn to soybean to wheat). Above-ground weedbiomass and species richness were lowest in the conventional system (high external chemical input of synthetic fertilizer and
herbicides, ploughed), intermediate in the no-till system (high external chemical input, no ploughing) and highest in the low-input (low external chemical input, ploughed) and organic systems (no external chemical input, ploughed) (Figure 22.1). 
A widely varying mixture of monocot (grass) and dicot specieswere represented in the conventional treatment and an equallyunpredictable set of annual grasses dominated the no-till treatment.
•• ••ecological
applications ofteninvolve economic and sociopoliticalconsiderationsfarmers often have toresist successionalprocesses
Conventional
No tillLow input
Organic(a)
Weed biomass (g m–2)
01993
(corn)50
1994
(soybean)1995
(wheat)1996
(corn)1997
(soybean)1998
(wheat)100150200250
(b)
Species density (no. m–2)
01993
(corn)1994
(soybean)1995
(wheat)1996
(corn)1997
(soybean)1998
(wheat)10
8
642Figure 22.1 (a) Weed biomass and 
(b) weed species richness in four
agricultural management treatments (see key; six replicate 1 ha plots in eachtreatment) over a period of 6 years
consisting of two rotations of corn (Zea mays ) to soybean ( Glycine max ) 
to wheat ( Triticum aestivum ). (After
Menalled et al. , 2001.)EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 634ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 635
On the other hand, the weed communities of the low-input 
and organic treatments were more constant: an annual dicot(Chenopodium album ) and two perennial weeds ( Trifolium pratense
and Elytrigia repens ) were the dominant species under these con-
ditions. Menalled et al. (2001) point out the potential advantages
of a management system that fosters a more predictable weed
community because control treatments can then be designedspeciﬁcally against the species concerned.
Other forms of agricultural 
‘gardening’ pose fewer problems inthe way they interrupt succession.Benzoin is an aromatic resin, used tomake incense, ﬂavoring and medicinal
products, which for hundreds of years has been tapped from 
the bark of tropical trees in the genus Styrax . Benzoin still pro-
vides a signiﬁcant income to many villagers in Sumatra who plant benzoin gardens ( S. paralleloneurum ) after clearing the
understory in 0.5–3.0 ha areas of montane broadleaf forest. Two years later, farmers thin all the larger trees to allow light to reach the saplings (the thinnings are left in the garden) and annual tapping begins after 8 years. Yields typically decline after30 years but resin may be harvested for up to 60 years before the garden is left to return to the forest. Garcia-Fernandez et al.
(2003) identiﬁed three categories of garden: G1 was the most plantation-like, with intensive thinning and high densities of S. paralleloneurum trees, and G3 was the most forest-like. Total
tree species richness was high in plots of primary (pristine) and
‘secondary’ forest (30–40 years after gardening had ceased) and also in the gardens, except for the most intensely managed situation where richness was signiﬁcantly lower (but neverthe-less with an average of 26 tree species) (Figure 22.2a). As predictedby succession theory (see Section 16.4), climax species typical of mature forest were most common in primary forest and there was a more even mix of pioneer and mid-successional tree species in secondary forest and in the least intensively managed gardens (G3) (Figure 22.2.b). However, gardens with anintermediate or high intensity of management were dominatedby mid-successional trees (mainly because benzoin trees are in this class). It is not unusual for indigenous people to be aware of a wide range of uses for forest plants. Figure 22.2c shows the representation in the garden and forest plots of trees in each offour classes: no known use (12%), subsistence use (food, ﬁber or medicine; 42%), local market use (23%) and internationalmarket use (23%). The international category dominated inintensively managed gardens (i.e. benzoin and its products)whereas trees in the subsistence and local market categorieswere well represented in less intensively managed gardens andin primary and secondary forest. Although benzoin manage-ment requires competing vegetation to be trimmed, tree speciesrichness remains quite high even in the most intensively managedgardens. This traditional form of forest gardening maintains adiverse community whose structure allows rapid recovery to 
a forest community when tapping ceases. It represents a good balance between development and conservation.
Fire is an important resource man-
agement tool for Australian aboriginal
people such as the clan who own theDukaladjarranj area of northeasternArnhem Land (Figure 22.3a). Burning,to provide green forage for game ani-mals, is planned by custodians (aboriginal people with specialresponsibilities for the land) and focuses initially on dry grasseson higher ground, moving progressively to moister sites as thesedry out with the passage of the season. Each ﬁre is typically oflow intensity and small in extent, producing a patchy mosaic of
burned and unburned areas and thus a diversity of habitats at different successional stages (see Section 16.7.1). Towards the endof the dry season, when it is very hot and dry, burning ceasesexcept in controllable situations such as the reburning of previ-ously burnt areas. In a collaboration between indigenous peopleand professional ecologists, Yibarbuk et al. (2001) lit experimental
ﬁres to assess their impact on the ﬂora and fauna. They foundthat burned sites attracted large kangaroos and other favored game and that important plant foods, such as yams, remained abundant (results that would have hardly been a surprise to theindigenous collaborators) (Figure 22.3b). Fire-sensitive vegeta-tion in decline elsewhere, such as Callitris intratropica woodlands
and sandstone heath dominated by myrtaceaous and proteacea-
ous shrubs, remained well represented in the study area. In addition, the Dukaladjarranj area compares favorably with theKakadu National Park, a conservation area with high vertebrateand plant diversity. Thus, Dukaladjarranj contains several rarespecies and a number of others that have declined in unmanagedareas and, moreover, the representation of exotic plant and animal invaders was remarkably low. The traditional regime, withits many small, low-intensity ﬁres, contrasts dramatically with themore typical contemporary pattern of intensive, uncontrolled ﬁresnear the end of the dry season. These blaze across vast areas ofwestern and central Arnhem Land (sometimes covering more than1 million ha) that are unoccupied and unmanaged, and regularlyﬁnd their way onto the western rim of the Arnhem Land plateauand into Kakadu and Nitmiluk National Parks (Figure 22.3a). It seems that continued aboriginal occupation of the study areaand the maintenance of traditional ﬁre management practices limits the accumulation of fuel (in ﬁre-promoting grass species and in litter), reducing the likelihood of massive ﬁres that can eliminate ﬁre-sensitive vegetation types. A return to indigenous-style burning seems to hold promise for the restoration and conservation of threatened species and communities in theselandscapes (Marsden-Smedley & Kirkpatrick, 2000) and providesimportant clues for the management of ﬁre-prone areas in otherparts of the world.
•• ••benzoin ‘gardening’
in Sumatra – rapidreversion to forestaboriginal burningregime providesresources andmaintains biotaEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 635636 CHAPTER 22
•• ••(b)
Proportion of individuals
0G1 G2 G3 SF PF20406080100
ba
daa
cb
ca acb
abb
cDbh 2–5 cm
Dbh 5–10 cmDbh > 10 cmAll trees(a)Species richness (1000 m2)
0G1 G2 G3 SF PF102030405060
b
bc
cab
ab
bab
ab
abab
bab
aaa
a
aa
a
Early successional
Mid successionalClimax
(c)
Proportion of individuals
0G1 G2 G3 SF PF204060a
daa
cb
aac
ba
a
ac
aa
ca80100
baNo known use
Subsistence useLocal marketInternational marketFigure 22.2 (a) Tree species richness in
different tree size classes (Dbh is diameter
at breast height) in three categories ofbenzoin garden (G1, most intenselymanaged; G2, intermediate; G3, least
intensively managed) and in secondaryforest (SF; 30–40 years after abandonmentof benzoin gardens) and in primary forest (PF). (b) Percentage of individualtrees in three successional categories. (c) Percentage of individual trees in variousutility categories. Each data point is basedon three replicate 1 ha plots. Differentletters above each type of bar indicate
statistically signiﬁcant differences. (After Garcia-Fernandez et al. , 2003.)EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 636ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 637
22.2.2 Managing succession for restoration
The goal of restoration ecology is
often a relatively stable successionalstage (Prach et al. , 2001) and ideally a
climax. Once an undesirable land use
ceases, managers need not intervene if they are prepared to 
wait for natural succession to run its course. Thus, abandonedrice ﬁelds in mountainous central Korea proceed from an annualgrass stage ( Alopecurus aequalis ), through forbs ( Aneilema keisak ),
rushes ( Juncus effusus ) and willows ( Salix koriyanagi ), to reach 
a species-rich and stable alder woodland community ( Alnus
japonica ) within 10–50 years (Figure 22.4) (Lee et al. , 2002).
Succession cannot always be counted on to promote habitatrestoration, especially if natural sources of seeds are small and distant, but this was not the case here. In fact, the only active 
intervention worth considering is the dismantling of artiﬁcialrice paddy levees to accelerate, by a few years, the early stagesof succession.
Meadow grasslands subject to agri-
cultural intensiﬁcation, including theapplication of artiﬁcial fertilizers andherbicides and heavy grazing regimes,have dramatically fewer plant species
than grasslands under historic ‘traditional’ management. Therestoration of biodiversity in these situations involves a sec-ondary succession that typically takes more than 10 years; it can be achieved by returning to a traditional regime withoutmineral fertilizer in which hay is cut in mid-July and cattle are
grazed in the fall (Smith et al. , 2003). However, in contrast to the
mountain rice ﬁeld case discussed above, meadow communityrecovery in lowland England by natural colonization from seedrain or the seed bank is a slow and unreliable process (Pywell et al. , 2002). Fortunately, recovery can be speeded up by sowing
a species-rich mixture of seeds of desirable plants adapted to the
prevailing conditions. Thus, in a 4-year study comparing species
richness of grasses and forbs in plots that were unsown (naturalregeneration from cereal stubble) or sown with a species-rich seedmixture (containing more than 25 species), the sown plots hadtwice as many established species in years 1 and 2 than naturallyregenerating plots (means of 26.4 and 22.0 compared with 10.4and 11.3, respectively). By year 4 there was little difference in speciesrichness (22.0 versus 18.7) but the sown treatment had a species
composition that included late successional grassland species andwas much closer to that found in local nonintensively farmed grasslands (Pywell et al. , 2002).
Restoration objectives often include
recovery not just of plants but of the animal components of communitiestoo. Tidal salt marshes are much rarerthan they once were because of drainage and tidal interferencethrough the installation of tide gates, culverts and dykes. Therestoration of tidal action (by removing tide gates, etc.) and thusof links between the marshes, estuaries and the larger coastal system along the Long Island Sound shoreline of Connecticut, USA,led to the recovery of salt marsh vegetation, including Spartina
•• ••restoration
sometimes needs no intervention . . .
. . . but may behastened by speciesintroductionsDarwin
Kakadu
National
Park
Nitmiluk
National
ParkManingrida
Study area
Arnhem Land plateau
0 100 kmN(a)
Macropod groups per cell
0.00.10.20.3(b)
0.4
Unburned Little
burnedSubstantially
 burned
Figure 22.3 (a) Location of the ﬁre management study area near the northeastern end of the Arnhem Plateau in the Northern Territory
of Australia; the position of two National Parks is also shown. (b) Mean number ( +2 SE) of kangaroo groups sighted during a helicopter
survey of 0.25 km2plots with different recent burning histories. (After Yibarbuk et al. , 2001.)
restoration timetable
for salt marsh animalcommunitiesEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 637638 CHAPTER 22
alterniﬂora , S. patens and Distichlis spicata . Recovery was relatively
fast (increasing at a rate of 5% of total area per year) where tidal
ﬂooding was frequent (i.e. at lower elevations and with highersoil watertables) but was otherwise slow (about 0.5% of total areaper year). In the fast recovery sites, it took 10–20 years to achieve
50% coverage of specialist salt marsh plants. Characteristic saltmarsh animals followed a similar timetable. Thus, in ﬁve sites in marshes at Barn Island that have been recovering for known periods (and for which nearby reference marshes are available for comparison), the high marsh snail Melampus bidentatus only
achieved densities comparable to reference conditions after 20 years(Figure 22.5a). The bird community also took 10–20 years to reacha community composition similar to reference circumstances. Marsh generalists that forage and breed both in uplands and tidal
wetlands (such as song sparrows Melospiza melodia and red-winged
blackbirds Agelaius phoeniceus ) dominated early in the restoration
sequence, to be replaced later by marsh specialists such as marshwrens Cistothorus palustris , snowy egrets Egretta thula and spotted
sandpipers Actitis macularia ) (Figure 22.5b). Typical ﬁsh com-
munities in restoration salt marsh creeks recovered more quickly,within 5 years. It seems that the restoration of a natural tidal regime sets marshes on trajectories towards restoration of full ecological functioning, although this generally takes one or more
decades. The process can probably be speeded up if managers plant salt marsh species.
22.2.3 Managing succession for conservation
Some endangered animal species areassociated with a particular stage ofsuccession and their conservation thendepends on an understanding of thesuccessional sequence; intervention
may be required to maintain theirhabitat at an appropriate successional stage. An intriguing example is provided by a giant New Zealand insect, the wetaDeinacrida mahoenuiensis (Orthoptera; Anostostomatidae). This
species, which was believed extinct after being formerlywidespread in forest habitats, was discovered in the 1970s in an isolated patch of gorse ( Ulex europaeus ). Ironically, in New
Zealand gorse is an introduced weed that farmers spend muchtime and effort attempting to control. Its dense, prickly sward 
provides a refuge for the giant weta against other introduced 
•• ••Relative importance value
0.010
Species sequence20 40 60 80 1000.1110100
Newly abandoned
3 years post-abandonment7 years post-abandonment10 years post-abandonmentAlder stand
Figure 22.4 Rank–abundance diagram 
of plant species grouped by site age (time
since abandonment of rice paddy ﬁeld).Importance values are the relative ground cover of the plant species present.
The alder stand was 50 years old. (After Lee et al. , 2002.)
understanding
succession is crucialfor the conservationof a rare insectEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 638ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 639
pests, particularly rats but also hedgehogs, stoats and possums,
which readily captured wetas in their original forest home. New Zealand’s Department of Conservation purchased thisimportant patch of gorse from the landowner who insisted that cattle should be permitted to overwinter in the reserve.
Conservationists were unhappy about this but the cattle sub-sequently proved to be part of the weta’s salvation. By opening
up paths through the gorse, the cattle provided entry for feral goats that browse the gorse, producing a dense hedge-like sward and preventing the gorse habitat from succeeding to a stage inappropriate to the wetas. This story involves a single endangered endemic insect together with a whole suite of intro-duced pests (gorse, rats, goats, etc.) and introduced domestic animals (cattle). Before the arrival of people in New Zealand, the island’s only land mammals were bats, and New Zealand’sendemic fauna has proved to be extraordinarily vulnerable to the mammals that arrived with people. However, by maintain-ing gorse succession at an early stage, the grazing goats providea habitat in which the weta can escape the attentions of the ratsand other predators.
22.3 Food webs, ecosystem functioning 
and management
22.3.1 Management guided by food web theory
Studies that unravel the complex inter-
actions in food webs (dealt with inChapter 20) can provide key informa-tion for managers on issues as diverseas minimizing human disease risk, setting objectives for marine
protected areas or predicting invaders with the most potential todisrupt ecosystem functioning.
22.3.1.1 Lyme disease
Lyme disease, which if untreated can
damage the heart and nervous systemand lead to a type of arthritis, each year affects tens of thousandsof people around the world. It is caused by a spirochete bacterium(Borrelia burgdorferi ) carried by ticks in the genus Ixodes . The ticks
take 2 years to pass through four developmental stages, involving
a succession of vertebrate hosts. Eggs are laid in the spring anduninfected larvae take a single blood meal from a host (usually asmall mammal or bird) before dropping off and molting into theoverwintering nymphal stage. Infected hosts transmit the spiro-chete to the larval ticks, which remain infective throughout theirlives (i.e. after they have molted into nymphs and subsequentlyinto adults). Next year the nymph seeks a host in the spring/early summer for another single blood meal; this is the most 
risky stage for human infection because the nymphs are small anddifﬁcult to detect and attach to hosts at a time of peak humanrecreation in forests and parks. Between 1 and 40% of nymphscarry the spirochete in Europe and the USA (Ostfeld & Keesing,2000). The nymph drops off and molts into an adult that takes a ﬁnal blood meal and reproduces on a third host, often a largermammal such as a deer.
•• ••(b)(a)Relative abundance
0.00
00.250.500.751.001.25
51 0 1 5 2 0Marsh 3Marsh 4Marsh 1Marsh 2Marsh 1Relative abundance
0
012345
51 0 1 5 2 0
Years of recoverySpecialists
Generalists
Figure 22.5 (a) Relative abundance of the snail Melampus
bidentatus (expressed as mean density in the restoration area
divided by density in a nearby reference marsh) in ﬁve sites in 
four marshes at Barn Island, Connecticut, that differ in the period since a natural tidal regime was restored. A relative abundance 
of 1.0 indicates a full recovery of this species. (b) Relativeabundance (recovering/reference) of birds considered as salt marsh specialists (
/H17009) and salt marsh generalists ( /H17033) on Barn 
Island marshes plotted against years of restoration at the time 
the counts were conducted. Again a relative abundance of 1.0 indicates full restoration of the specialist or generalist guild.(After Warren et al. , 2002.)understanding 
food webs formanagement . . .
. . . of disease . . .EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 639640 CHAPTER 22
The most abundant small mammal host in the eastern USA,
and by far the most competent transmitter of the spirochete, is
the white-footed mouse ( Peromyscus leucopus ). Jones et al. (1998)
added acorns, a preferred food of the mice, to the ﬂoor of an oakforest to simulate one of the occasional crop masting years that
occur, and found mice numbers increased the following year and that the prevalence of spirochete infection in nymphal black-legged ticks ( Ixodes scapularis ) increased 2 years after acorn addi-
tion. It seems that despite the complexity of the food web of which the spirochetes are part, it may be possible to predict high-risk years for transmission to humans well in advance by monitoring the acorn crop. Of further interest to managers is evidence that outbreaks of pest moths, whose caterpillars can cause massive defoliation of forest, may be more likely to occur
1 year after very poor acorn crops, when mice, which also feedon moth pupae, are rare ( Jones et al. , 1998).
A ﬁnal point about disease transmission is worth emphasiz-
ing. The potential mammal, bird and reptile hosts of ticks showa great variation in the efﬁciency with which they are competentto transmit the spirochete to the tick. Ostfeld and Keesing (2000)hypothesized that a high species richness of potential hosts wouldresult in lower disease prevalence in humans if the high trans-mission efﬁciency of the key species (such as white-footed mice)is diluted by the presence of a multitude of less competent species.(Note that what really matters is whether the total number of individuals of the more competent species is ‘swamped’ by a large number of individuals of the less competent ones; relative
abundance is important as well as species richness.) Ostfeld andKeesing produced evidence in favor of their hypothesis in the form of a negative relationship between disease cases and smallmammal host richness in 10 regions of the USA. Unfortunately,cases of Lyme disease were concentrated in more northerly states,where species richness was lower, suggesting that both diseaseand mammal richness follow a latitudinal pattern. Thus, whetherthe link between the two is causal or incidental remains to be deter-mined. This is an important question, however, because a negativerelationship between host diversity and disease transmission forvector-borne diseases (including Chagas’ disease, plague and Congohemorrhagic fever) would provide one more reason for managersto act to maintain biodiversity.
22.3.1.2 Management for an abalone ﬁshery
Sometimes biodiversity can be too
high to achieve particular managementobjectives! Commercial and recreationalﬁsheries for abalones (gastropods in thefamily Haliotidae) are prone to collapse
through overﬁshing. Adult abalones do not move far and the pro-
tection of broodstock in reserved portions of their coastal marinehabitat has potential for promoting the export of planktonic larvae to enhance the harvested populations outside the reserves 
(see Section 15.4.2). However, the most common function ofmarine-protected areas is the conservation of biodiversity, and thequestion arises whether protected areas can serve both ﬁsheriesmanagement and biodiversity objectives. A keystone species incoastal habitats along the Paciﬁc coast of North America, includ-ing those in California, is the sea otter ( Enhydra lutris ), hunted 
almost to extinction in the 18th and 19th centuries but increas-ingly widespread as a result of protected status. Sea otters eatabalones, and valuable ﬁsheries for red abalone ( Haliotus rufescens )
developed while sea otters were rare; now there is concern thatthe ﬁsheries will be unsustainable in the presence of sea otters.Fanshawe et al. (2003) compared the population characteristics 
of abalone in sites along the Californian coast that varied in harvest intensity and sea otter presence: two sites lacked sea ottersand had been ‘no-take’ abalone zones for 20 years or more, threesites lacked sea otters but permitted recreational ﬁshing, andfour sites were ‘no-take’ zones that contained sea otters. The aim
was to determine whether marine-protected areas can help makethe abalone ﬁshery sustainable when all links in the food web arefully restored. Sea otters and recreational harvest inﬂuenced redabalone populations in similar ways but the effects were very muchstronger where sea otters were present. Red abalone populations inprotected areas had substantially higher densities (15–20 abaloneper 20 m
2) than in areas with sea otters ( <4 per 20 m2), while 
harvested areas generally had intermediate densities. In addition,
63–83% of individual abalones in protected areas were larger thanthe legal harvesting limit of 178 mm, compared with 18–26% inharvested areas and less than 1% in sea otter areas. Finally, in the
presence of sea otters the abalones were mainly restricted to creviceswhere they are least vulnerable to predation. Multiple-use pro-tected areas are not likely to be feasible where a desirable top predator feeds intensively on prey targeted by a ﬁshery. Fanshaweet al. (2003) recommend separate single-purpose categories of 
protected area, but this may not work in the long term either;the maintenance of the status quo when sea otters are expanding
their range is likely eventually to require culling of the otters, something that may prove politically unacceptable.
22.3.1.3 Invasions by salmonid ﬁsh in streams and lakes
Just as sea otters alter the behavior of
their abalone prey, so the introducedbrown trout ( Salmo trutta ) in New
Zealand changes the behavior of herbivorous invertebrates (including
nymphs of the mayﬂy Deleatidium spp.) that graze algae on the beds
of invaded streams – daytime activity is signiﬁcantly reduced inthe presence of trout (Townsend, 2003). Brown trout rely prin-cipally on vision to capture prey, whereas the native ﬁsh they havereplaced ( Galaxias spp.) rely on mechanical cues. The hours of
•• ••. . . and of both
harvested shellﬁshand a charismatic top predatorfood web andecosystemconsequences ofinvading ﬁshEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 640ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 641
darkness thus provide a refuge against trout predation analogous
to the crevices occupied by the abalone. That an exotic predatorsuch as trout has direct effects on Galaxias distribution or mayﬂy
behavior is not surprising, but the inﬂuence also cascades to theplant trophic level. Three treatments were established in artiﬁcial
ﬂow-through channels placed in a real stream – no ﬁsh, Galaxias
present or trout present, at naturally occurring densities. After 12 days, algal biomass was highest where trout were present (Figure 22.6a), partly because of a reduction in grazer biomass(Figure 22.6b) but also because of a reduction of grazing (onlyfeeding at night) by the grazers that remain. This trophic cascadealso changed the rate at which radiant energy was captured by thealgae (annual net primary production was six times greater in atrout stream than in a neighboring Galaxias stream; Huryn, 1998)
and, this in turn, resulted in more efﬁcient cycling of nitrogen,
the limiting nutrient in these streams (Simon et al. , 2004). Thus,
important elements of ecosystem functioning, namely energyﬂux (see Chapter 17) and nutrient ﬂux (see Chapter 18), were alteredby the invading trout.
Other salmonids, including rain-
bow trout ( Oncorhyncus mykiss ), have
invaded many ﬁshless lakes in NorthAmerica where a similar increase inplant (phytoplankton) biomass hasbeen recorded. A ﬁsh-induced reductionin benthic and planktonic grazers ispartly responsible, but Schindler et al.
(2001) argue that the main reason for increased primary produc-
tion is that trout feed on benthic and littoral invertebrates andthen, via their excretion, transfer phosphorus (the limiting nutri-ent) into the open water habitat of the phytoplankton. In theirreview of the impacts of these and other freshwater invaders on
community and ecosystem functioning, Simon and Townsend(2003) conclude that biosecurity managers should pay particularattention to invaders that have a novel method of resourceacquisition or a broad niche that links previously unlinked
ecosystem compartments.
22.3.1.4 Conﬂicting hypotheses about invasions
A widely cited hypothesis in invasion
biology related to population and foodweb interactions (see Chapters 19 and20) and species richness (see Chapter 21) is that species-rich communities are more resistant to invasion than species-poor 
communities. This is because resources are more fully utilized in the former and competitors and predators are more likely to be present that can exclude potential invaders (Elton, 1958).On this basis, as invaders accumulate in an ecosystem, the rateof further invasions should be reduced (Figure 22.7a). But the opposite has also been postulated – the ‘invasional meltdown’hypothesis (Figure 22.7b) (Simberloff & Von Holle, 1999). Thisargues that the rate of invasions will actually increase with time,partly because the disruption of native species promotes further
invasions and partly because some invaders have facilitativerather than negative effects on later arrivals. Ricciardi’s (2001) review of invasions of the Great Lakes of North America revealsa pattern that conforms closely to the meltdown hypothesis(Figure 22.7c). Among interactions between pairs of invaders, it is usually competition ( −/−) and predation ( +/−) that are
given prominence. Ricciardi’s review is unusual because it alsoaccounted for mutualisms ( +/+), commensalisms ( +/0) and
•• ••managers should
beware invaders that link ecosystemcompartments in new waysFish predation regime4
32
1
0
NGTInvertebrate
biomass (g m–2)(b)
NGTAlgal
biomass (µg cm–2)3
2
1
0(a)
Figure 22.6 (a) Total algal biomass
(chlorophyll a) and (b) invertebrate
biomass ( ±SE) for an experiment
performed in the summer in a small 
New Zealand stream. G, Galaxias present;
N, no ﬁsh; T, trout present. (After Flecker
& Townsend, 1994.)
where do invaders ﬁt
into food webs?EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 641••642 CHAPTER 22
amensalisms ( −/0). There were 101 pairwise interactions in all,
three cases of mutualism, 14 of commensalism, four of amensal-
ism, 73 of predation (herbivory, carnivory and parasitism) and seven of competition. Thus, about 17% of reported casesinvolved one invader facilitating the success of another, whether
directly or indirectly. An example of direct facilitation is the provision by invading dreissenid mussels of food in the form of fecal deposits and of increased habitat heterogeneity that favor further invaders such as the amphipod Echinogammarus
ischnus (Stewart et al. , 1998). Indirect facilitation occurred in the
1950s and 1960s when the parasitic sea lamprey Petromyzon 
marinus suppressed native predatory salmonid ﬁsh to the bene-
ﬁt of invading ﬁsh such as Alosa pseudoharengus (Ricciardi, 2001). 
In addition, one-third of the cases of predation in Ricciardi’s 
analysis could be said to involve ‘facilitation’ because a newcomerbeneﬁtted from a previously established invader. We do notknow how widely the invasional meltdown hypothesis applies in different ecosystems, but the history of the Great Lakes sug-gests that it would generally be unwarranted for managers to take no further action just because several invaders were alreadyestablished.
22.3.2 Managing eutrophication by manipulating lake
food webs
The excess input of nutrients (particu-
larly phosphorus; Schindler, 1977) fromsources such as sewage and agricul-tural runoff has caused many ‘healthy’oligotrophic lakes (low nutrients, low plant productivity with 
abundant macrophytes, and clear water) to switch to a eutrophiccondition. Here, high nutrient inputs lead to high phytoplanktonproductivity (sometimes dominated by bloom-forming toxicspecies), making the water turbid and, in the worst situations, leading to anoxia and ﬁsh kills (see Section 18.4.3). In some cases the obvious management response of reducing phosphorusinput (by sewage diversion, for example) may cause rapid and complete reversal. Lake Washington provides a success story in this reversible category (Edmondson, 1991), which includes
lakes that are deep, cold and rapidly ﬂushing and lakes that have only been brieﬂy subject to cultural eutrophication (Car-penter et al. , 1999). At the other end of the scale are lakes that
seem to be irreversible because the minimum attainable rate of 
phosphorus input, or phosphorus recycling from accumulated
reserves in lake sediment, is too high to allow the switch back to oligotrophy. This applies particularly to lakes in phosphorus-rich regions (e.g. related to soil chemistry) and lakes that havereceived very high phosphorus inputs over an extended period.In an intermediate category, which Carpenter et al. (1999) refer
to as hysteretic lakes, eutrophication can be reversed by com-
bining the control of phosphorus inputs with interventions such as chemical treatment to immobilize phosphorus in the 
sediment or a biological intervention known as biomanipula-tion. Our discussion focuses on this ﬁnal category because it depends on a knowledge of interactions in food webs (seeChapter 20) between piscivorous ﬁsh, planktivorous ﬁsh, herb-ivorous zooplankton and phytoplankton to guide the manage-ment of lakes towards a particular ecosystem endpoint (Mehneret al. , 2002).
••Cumulative number of invaders
0
1810–19(c)
20406080100120140160180
1830–39
1850–591870–791890–991910–191930–391950–591970–791990–99 Time(a)Cumulative number of successful invaders(b)
YearFigure 22.7 Predicted temporal trends 
in the cumulative number of successful
invasions according to (a) the bioticresistance hypothesis and (b) the invasionalmeltdown hypothesis. (c) Cumulative
number of invaders of the Great Lakes of North America – the pattern conforms to the invasional meltdown hypothesis.(After Ricciardi, 2001.)
which lakes can be
managed to reversenutrient enrichment?EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 642••ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 643
The primary aim of biomanipulation
is to improve water quality by lowering
phytoplankton density and thus increas-ing water clarity. The approach involves
increasing the grazing of zooplankton on phytoplankton via a 
reduction in the biomass of zooplanktivorous ﬁsh (by ﬁshing them out or by increasing piscivorous ﬁsh biomass). Major suc-cesses have occurred in shallow lakes where nutrient levels arenot too excessive (Meijer et al. , 1999). Lathrop et al. (2002) were
more ambitious than most in attempting to biomanipulate therelatively large and deep eutrophic Lake Mendota in Wisconsin,USA. They combined the management objective of improvingwater quality with one of augmenting the recreational ﬁshery for piscivorous walleye ( Stizostedion vitreum ) and northern pike 
(Esox lucius ). In total, more than 2 million ﬁngerlings of the two
species were stocked beginning in 1987, and piscivore biomass
rapidly responded and stabilized at 4–6 kg ha
−1(Figure 22.8a). The
combined biomass of zooplanktivorous ﬁsh declined, as expected,
from 300–600 kg ha−1prior to biomanipulation to 20–40 kg ha−1
in subsequent years. The reduction in predation pressure on zooplankton (Figure 22.8b) led, in turn, to a switch from smallzooplanktivorous grazers ( Daphnia galeata mendotae ) to the 
larger and more efﬁcient grazer D. pulicaria . In many years when
D. pulicaria were dominant, their high grazing pressure reduced
phytoplankton density and increased water clarity (Figure 22.8c).
The desired response would probably have been more emphatichad there not been an increase in phosphorus concentrations dur-ing the biomanipulation period, mainly as a result of increasedagricultural and urban runoff. Lathrop et al. (2002) conclude that
the favorable biomanipulation state of high grazing pressureshould see further improvements as new management actions to reduce phosphorus inputs take effect.
Cultural eutrophication has equally dramatic effects in rivers,
estuaries and marine ecosystems. Coastal eutrophication has
become a major cause for concern. The United Nations Environ-ment Program (UNEP) has reported that 150 sea areas worldwideare now regularly starved of oxygen as a result of the decom-position of algal blooms fueled particularly by nitrogen from agricultural runoff of fertilizers and sewage from large cities(UNEP, 2003).
••biomanipulation 
of food webs
Fingerlings stocked (1000s)
(b)
0.4
1976
Year0.81.21.6
0
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98Planktivory (g m–2 day–1)(a)
200400600800
0WalleyeBiomanipulation →
1976 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
1976
Year6
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98Depth (Secchi)(c)
543210Year20
1976406080
0Northern pike
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
Figure 22.8 (right ) (a) Fingerlings of two piscivorous ﬁsh stocked 
in Lake Mendota; the major biomanipulation effort started 
in 1987. (b) Estimates of zooplankton biomass consumed byzooplanktivorous ﬁsh per unit area per day. The principalzooplanktivore species were Coregonus artedi , Perca ﬂavescens
and Morone chrysops . (c) Mean and range during summer of the
maximum depth at which a Secchi disc is visible (a measure 
of water clarity); dotted vertical lines are for periods when the large and efﬁcient grazer Daphnia pulicaria was dominant. 
(After Lathrop et al. , 2002.)EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 643••644 CHAPTER 22
22.3.3 Managing ecosystem processes in agriculture
Intensive land use is not only associated with phosphorus pollu-
tion but also with an increase in the amount of the nitrate thatleaches into the groundwater and thence into rivers and lakes,affecting food webs and ecosystem functioning (see Section 18.4.4).The excess nitrate also ﬁnds its way into drinking water where
it is a health hazard, potentially contributing to the formation ofcarcinogenic nitrosamines and in young children to a reductionin the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. The EnvironmentalProtection Agency in the United States recommends a maximumconcentration of nitrate of 10 mg l
−1.
Pigs, cattle and poultry are the
three major nitrogen contributors in
industrialized agriculture feedlots. Thenitrogen-rich waste from factory-farmed
poultry is easily dried and forms a
transportable, inoffensive and valuable fertilizer for crops and gardens. In contrast, the excreta from cattle and pigs are 90% water and have an unpleasant smell. A commercial unit for fattening 10,000 pigs produces as much pollution as a town of 18,000inhabitants. The law in many parts of the world increasingly restrictsthe discharge of agricultural slurry into watercourses. The simplest practice returns the material to the land as semisolidmanure or as sprayed slurry. This dilutes its concentration in the
environment to what might have occurred in a more primitiveand sustainable type of agriculture and converts pollutant into fertilizer. However, if nitrate ions are not taken up again by plants, rainfall leaches them into the groundwater. In fact, the disassociation of livestock and crops in farms specializing in oneor the other, rather than mixed farms, has made a major con-tribution to nitrate pollution of waterways. For example, the centralization of livestock production in the USA has tended tooccur in regions that produce little crop feed (Mosier et al. , 2002).
Thus, for example, of the 11 Tg of nitrogen excreted in animalwaste in the USA in 1990 only 34% was returned to cropped ﬁelds.Much of the remainder will eventually have found its way intowaterways.
Most of the ﬁxed nitrogen in natural communities is present
in the vegetation and in the organic fraction of the soil. As organ-
isms die they contribute organic matter to the soil, and thisdecomposes to release carbon dioxide so that the ratio of carbonto nitrogen falls; when the ratio approaches 10 : 1, nitrogen beginsto be released from the soil organic matter as ammonium ions. In aerated regions of the soil, the ammonium ions becomeoxidized to nitrite and then to nitrate ions, which are leached by rainfall down the soil proﬁle. Both the processes of organicmatter decomposition and the formation of nitrates are usuallyfastest in the summer, when natural vegetation is growing mostquickly. Nitrates may then be absorbed by the growing vegeta-tion as fast as they are formed – they are not present in the soillong enough for signiﬁcant quantities to be leached out of the 
••plants’ rooting zone and lost to the community. Natural vegeta-
tion most often is a ‘nitrogen-tight’ ecosystem.
In contrast, there are several reasons why nitrates leach more
easily from agricultural land and managed forests than from natural vegetation.
1For part of the year agricultural land carries little or no living
vegetation to absorb nitrates (and for many years forestbiomass is below its maximum).
2Crops and managed forests are usually monocultures that cancapture nitrates only from their own rooting zones, whereasnatural vegetation often has a diversity of rooting systems anddepths.
3When straw and forestry waste are burned, the organic 
nitrogen within them is returned to the soil as nitrates.
4When agricultural land is used for grazing animals theirmetabolism speeds up the rate at which carbon is respired,reduces the C : N ratio, and increases nitrate formation andleaching.
5Nitrogen in agriculture fertilizer is usually applied only onceor twice a year rather than being steadily released as it is dur-ing the growth of natural vegetation; it is therefore more read-ily leached and ﬁnds its way into drainage waters.
Because nitrogen is not efﬁciently
recycled on agricultural land or in
managed forests, repeated cropping
leads to losses of nitrogen from theecosystem and thus to decreasing crop productivity. To main-tain crop yields the available nitrogen has to be supplemented with fertilizer nitrogen, some of which is obtained by mining potassium nitrate in Chile and Peru, but the majority comes fromthe energy-expensive industrial process of nitrogen-ﬁxation, in which nitrogen is catalytically combined with hydrogen under high pressure to form ammonia and, in turn, nitrate. Nitrogenfertilizers are applied in agriculture either as nitrates or as ureaor ammonium compounds (which are oxidized to nitrates).However, it is wrong to regard artiﬁcial fertilization as the onlypractice that leads to nitrate pollution; nitrogen ﬁxed by crops oflegumes such as alfalfa, clover, peas and beans also ﬁnds its wayinto nitrates that leach into drainage water. Figure 22.9 shows how the amounts of synthetic fertilizer and nitrogen-ﬁxing cropshave increased in the last 50 years, and the dramatic increases are set to continue over the next half century (Tilman et al. , 2001),
particularly in developing countries.
A variety of approaches are avail-
able to tackle the problems of nitrate indrinking water and eutrophication, forexample by maintaining ground coverof vegetation year-round, by practising mixed cropping rather thanmonoculture, by integrating animal and crop production and moregenerally returning organic matter to the soil, by maintaining low
the problem is
getting worseproblems withnutrient enrichmentof land
management of thenutrient enrichmentof landEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 644••ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 645
stocking levels, by matching nitrogen supply to crop demand 
and by using advanced ‘controlled release’ fertilizers (Mosier et al. , 2002). The role played by nitrogen-ﬁxing symbionts (both
fungal arbuscular mycorrhizae and bacterial rhizobia) is of particular interest. Root symbionts do not augment crop product-
ivity consistently. Rather, different species, or the same speciesunder different soil conditions, can range from acting parasitically(when they act as a sink for plant resources in the relationship) tomutualistic (when they signiﬁcantly enhance plant performance).Kiers et al. (2002) argue that research is needed to determine how
farm management practices, including fertilization, ploughing andcrop rotation, inﬂuence the short-term responses and, over a slightly longer timeframe, the evolution of nitrogen-ﬁxing sym-bionts. Such knowledge would help identify management regimes
to enhance mutualistic rather than parasitic interactions.
22.3.4 Ecosystem health and its assessment
Many ecosystems around the world
have been degraded by human activities.Using an analogy with human health,managers frequently describe ecosys-tems as ‘unhealthy’ if their community
structure (species richness, species com-
position, food web architecture – see Chapters 16, 20 and 21) orecosystem functioning (productivity, nutrient dynamics, decom-position – see Chapters 17 and 18) has been fundamentally upsetby human pressures. Aspects of ecosystem health are sometimes
reﬂected directly in human health (nitrogen content in ground-water and thus drinking water, toxic algae in lakes and oceans,species richness of animal hosts that transmit human diseases inoak forests) but also in natural processes (ecosystem services) that people value, such as ﬂood control, the availability of wildfood (including hunted animals and gathered fungi and plants) 
and recreational opportunities. Management strategies are oftenframed in the context of pressure (human actions), state (resulting
community structure and ecosystem functioning) and managementresponse (Figure 22.10) (Fairweather, 1999). Just as physicians use
indicators in their assessment of human health (body temperature,blood pressure, etc.), ecosystem managers need ecosystem healthindicators to help set priorities for action and to determine theextent to which their interventions have been successful.
The ponderosa pine forests ( Pinus
ponderosa ) of the western USA can 
be used to illustrate the relationship
between pressure, state and response(Rapport et al. , 1998). A variety of human inﬂuences are at play
but Yazvenko and Rapport (1997) consider the most importantpressure has been ﬁre suppression (just as we saw in the Australianecosystem described in Section 22.2.1, ponderosa pine forestsevolved in a situation where periodic natural ﬁres occurred).
With ﬁre suppression, the state of the forest has shifted towardsdecreased productivity and increased tree mortality, changedpatterns of nutrient cycling, and an increased rate and magnitudeof outbreaks of tree pests and diseases. These changed properties
••
N fixed (Tg N yr–1)
0196150
Year1970 1980 1990 1995100150200250300
Natural N fixation
Crop N fixationNOx combustion
Synthetic fertilizerFigure 22.9 Estimates of global nitrogen
ﬁxation for representative years since 1961
in four categories. Natural nitrogen ﬁxation remained constant but ﬁxation bycrops and in the production of synthetic
fertilizer both increased dramatically. NO
xcombustion refers to the oxidation 
of atmospheric nitrogen when fossil fuels
are burnt; NOxis deposited in downwind
ecosystems. (After Galloway et al. , 1995.)
characterizing the
state of degradedecosystems – ananalogy with humanhealthecosystem health of a forestEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 645646 CHAPTER 22
can be taken as indicators of ecosystem health and successful 
restoration (response) will be evident when the indicatorsreverse the trends.
River health has been measured in
a number of ways, from assessment 
of abiotic evidence of pressures (e.g.nutrient concentrations and sediment
loads), through community composition to ecosystem function-ing (such as the rate of decomposition of leaves of overhangingvegetation that fall naturally into rivers; Gessner & Chauvet, 2002).Some health indexes include more than one of these indicators;in other cases managers rely on a single measure. In NewZealand, for example, river managers use the macroinvertebratecommunity index (MCI) (Stark, 1993). This is based on the pres-
ence or absence of certain types of river invertebrates that differin their ability to tolerate pollution; healthy streams with abund-ant species that are intolerant of pollution have high values of MCI (120 or above) whereas unhealthy streams have values aslow as 80 or less. Figure 22.11a shows the relationship, for siteson the Kakaunui River on the east coast of New Zealand’s SouthIsland, between MCI and the percentage of the catchment areathat has been developed (for pasture or urban development;here land development is the pressure).
We should not lose sight of the fact
that the concept of ecosystem health isgenerally a social construct. A healthyecosystem is one that the community
believes to be healthy and different social groups hold different
ideas about this (e.g. anglers consider that a river is healthy if it contains many big representatives of preferred ﬁsh species; parents if their children do not get sick swimming in the river;conservationists if native species are abundant). The Kakaunui Riveris within the territory of a Maori group who wished to developa tool so their perceptions of river health could be taken into
account by managers. Their Cultural Stream Health Measure(CSHM) includes components related to the extent to which thesurrounding catchment area, the riparian zone, the banks and thestream bed appear impacted by human activities. The CSHM
(Figure 22.11b) turned out to be strongly correlated with the MCIdespite the fact that it included no invertebrate component.
22.4 Biodiversity and management
22.4.1 Selecting conservation areas
Producing individual species survival
plans may be the best way to deal with species recognized to be in deeptrouble and identiﬁed to be of specialimportance (e.g. keystone species, evolutionarily unique species,
charismatic large animals that are easy to ‘sell’ to the public). How-ever, there is no possibility that all endangered species could bedealt with one at a time. For instance, the US Fish and WildlifeService calculated it would need to spend about $4.6 billion over10 years to fully recover all gazetted species in the USA (USDepartment of the Interior, 1990), whereas the annual budget for1993 was $60 million (Losos, 1993). In the face of such fundingshortfalls, there has been a growing trend towards multispeciesrather than single-species protection plans, but this carries a risk
that the speciﬁc requirements of endangered species will receiveinsufﬁcient attention. Thus, an analysis of USA cases showed that species in multispecies plans were signiﬁcantly more likelyto exhibit declining population trends (Boersma et al. , 2001). 
For this reason, Clark and Harvey (2002) advocate the groupingtogether of species according to the threats they face. Despite 
•• ••ecosystem health 
of a river
ecosystem health as asocial constructmultispecies orsingle-speciesmanagement plans?Human pressures on ecosystems
• Pollution
• Physical habitat change
• Changed disturbance regimes
• Harvesting
• InvasionsPressure
Altered structure and functioning• Lower biodiversity
• Shift to earlier successional stage
• Eutrophication
• Lower resilience
• Decreased ecosystem services
• Increased human health riskState
Societal/management response• Set objectives to reduce pressures and
   improve state
• Devise indicators of ecosystem health
• Monitor performanceResponseFigure 22.10 The linkage between
pressures caused by human activities, state
in terms of community composition and
ecosystem processes, and managementresponse . Adverse effects on ecosystems
sometimes involve processes with clear
value in human terms; such impactedecosystem services include reducedrecreational opportunities, poor waterquality, diminished natural ﬂood control,negative impacts on harvestable wildlifeand on biodiversity generally.EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 646ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 647
some shortcomings, however, we can generally expect to con-
serve the greatest biodiversity if we protect whole communitiesby setting aside protected areas.
Protected areas of various kinds
(national parks, nature reserves, 
multiple-use management areas, etc.)grew in number and area through the
20th century, with the greatest expansion occurring since 1970.However, the 4500 protected areas in existence in 1989 still onlyrepresented 3.2% of the world’s land area. At best, and given thepolitical will, perhaps 6% of land area may eventually be providedprotection – the rest would be considered necessary to providethe natural resources needed by the human population (Primack,1993). Understandably, but nevertheless disturbingly, reserves have
often been established on land that no one else wants (Figure 22.12).Areas of high species richness and distributions of endangered plantand animal species often overlap with human population centers(Figure 22.13). Thus, although protection of wilderness is of
value and relatively easy, conserving maximum diversity willrequire greater focus on areas of high human value.
Priorities for marine conservation,
which have lagged behind terrestrialefforts, are now being urgentlyaddressed. In taxonomic terms, most ofthe world’s biota is found in the sea (32 of the 33 known animalphyla are marine, 15 exclusively so) and marine communities are
•• ••protected areas:
limits to growth
priorities for marineprotected areasCSHM score
100060245
80
Percent catchment developed(b)
3
1MCI score
10006040120
80
Percent catchment developed(a)
80
Figure 22.11 Relationships between
percentage development of the catchment
area of sites in the Kakaunui River (for pasture and urban use) and (a) themacroinvertebrate community index
(MCI), commonly used by river managersin New Zealand, and (b) the Maori Cultural Stream Health Measure (CSHM).(After Townsend et al. , 2004.)
0
Moderate24
20
16
12
8
4
Low
HighModerate
FlatSteep
% land protected
Fertility
TopographyFigure 22.12 Protected areas in
southwest Australia are most often 
situated in steeply sloping and poorlyproductive areas that are not in demandfor agriculture or urban development.
(After Pressey, 1995; Bibby, 1998.)EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 647648 CHAPTER 22
subject to a number of potentially adverse inﬂuences, including
overﬁshing, habitat disruption and pollution from land-basedactivities. There are some fundamental distinctions betweenmarine and terrestrial ecosystems that need to be borne in mindwhen designing marine reserves. Most prominent among these
is the greater ‘openness’ of marine areas, with long-distance dis-
persal of nutrients, organic and inorganic matter, planktonic
organisms and the reproductive propagules of benthic organismsand ﬁsh (Carr et al. , 2003; see also Section 15.4.2).
The overall aim of conservation
areas, whether terrestrial or marine, isto represent the biota of each region ina way that separates the biodiversityfrom the processes that threaten it.
Margules and Pressey (2000) recommend the following steps for
systematic conservation planning.
1Compile data on biodiversity and on the distribution of rare
and endangered species in the planning region.
2Identify conservation goals and set explicit conservation tar-gets for species and community types as well as quantitativetargets for minimum reserve size and connectivity.
3Review existing conservation areas to measure the extent to which quantitative goals have already been achieved andidentify imminent threats to underrepresented species and
community types.
4Select additional conservation areas to augment existingreserves in a way that best achieves the conservation goals (discussed further below).
5Implement conservation actions having decided the most
appropriate form of management for each area and having established an implementation timetable if resources are notavailable for all actions to be carried out at once.
6Maintain the required values of conservation areas and monitor key indicators that will reﬂect management success,modifying management as required.
We know that the biotas of differ-
ent locations vary in species richness
(centers of diversity – see Section 21.1),the extent to which the biota is unique(centers of endemism) and the extent towhich the biota is endangered (hot spots of extinction, for exam-ple because of imminent habitat destruction). One or more of thesecriteria could be used to prioritize potential areas for protection (Figure 22.14). Moreover, if we were to give less weight to the‘existence’ value of species (every species equal) and moreweight to the potential value of species that may provide future
•• ••systematic approach
to conservationplanningBottom 20%
20–40%
40–60%
60–80%
Top 20%County ranking(a) (b) (c)
Figure 22.13 Counties of California ranked according to: (a) plant species richness (number per 2.59 km2 sample area); (b) the proportion
of plant species listed as threatened or endangered; and (c) human population density. (After Dobson et al. , 2001.)
centers of diversity,
endemism, extinctionand utilityEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 648ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 649
beneﬁt (for food, domestication, medical products, etc.) we
could prioritize locations that contained more species likely to be useful (centers of utility).
But, biodiversity encompasses more
than just species richness. The selection
of new areas should also try to ensureprotection of representatives of as manytypes of community and ecosystem as
possible. Two key principles here are complementarity and irre-
placeability (Pressey et al. , 1993).
With limited resources, the ideal strategy is to assess the con-
tent of candidate areas and to proceed in a stepwise fashion, selecting at each step the site that is most complementary to theothers in the features it contains. A number of algorithms are 
now available to carry out this procedure efﬁciently. For example,one algorithm lays more stress on the degree of uniqueness ofthe community or land system, while another lays more stresson the average rareness of the land systems present in the dif-ferent locations (Figure 22.15a).
A related but subtly different approach identiﬁes irreplaceability
as a fundamental measure of the conservation value of a site.Irreplaceability is an index of the potential contribution that a site
will make to a deﬁned conservation goal and the extent to whichthe options for conservation are lost if the site is lost (Figure 22.15b).The notions of complementarity and irreplaceability can equallywell be applied to strategies designed to maximize species rich-
ness. However, complementarity algorithms for species richnessshould be implemented with care because they have a tendencyto select areas that are at the margins of species ranges more oftenthan would be expected by chance (Araujo & Williams, 2001),and rare species could do less well at the margins than in the centers of their ranges.
A perhaps rather surprising applica-
tion of island biogeography theory (seeSection 21.5) is in nature conservation.
This is because many conserved areasand nature reserves are surrounded byan ‘ocean’ of habitat made unsuitable, and therefore hostile, by people. Can the study of islands in general provide us with‘design principles’ that can be used in the planning of naturereserves? The answer is a cautious ‘yes’ (Soulé, 1986); some general points can be made.
•• ••Southwest
Australia
New ZealandNew
CaledoniaWestern
Ghats andSri Lanka
MadagascarChoco/
Darien/WesternEcuador
Central
ChileCaribbean
Brazil’sAtlanticforestMediterranean
basin
Brazil’s
CerradoW. African
forests
Cape Floristic
ProvinceSouth Central
China
Indo-Burma
SundalandPhilippines
WallaceaEastern Arc
Forests,Tanzania/KenyaPolynesiaMicronesiaCalifornia
FloristicProvinceCaucasus
Succulent
karooPolynesia
MicronesiaMesoamerica
Figure 22.14 The global distribution of biodiversity hot spots where exceptional concentrations of endemic species are undergoing
exceptional loss of habitat. As many as 44% of all species of the earth’s vascular plants and 35% of its vertebrates are conﬁne d to 25 hot
spots that make up only 1.4% of its land surface. (After Myers et al. , 2000.)
the key concepts of
complementarity and irreplaceability
design of naturereserves: clues fromisland biogeographytheoryEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 649650 CHAPTER 22
1One problem that conservation managers sometimes face 
is whether to construct one large reserve or several small ones adding up to the same total area (sometimes referred to as the SLOSS (single large or several small) debate). If eachof the small reserves supported the same species, then it
would be preferable to construct the larger reserve in the expectation of conserving more species (this recommenda-tion derives from the species–area relationships discussed inSection 21.5.1).2On the other hand, if the region as a whole is heterogeneous,
then each of the small reserves may support a different groupof species and the total conserved might exceed that in a largereserve. In fact, collections of small islands tend to contain more species than a comparable area composed of one or a
few large islands. The pattern is similar for habitat islands and,most signiﬁcantly, for national parks. Thus, several small parkscontained more species than larger ones of the same area instudies of mammals and birds in East African parks, of mammals
•• ••Representation
of land systems
20 2412
12
Representation of ecosystem types817
4 8 16
100
50
9
4
1Irreplaceability
values(a) 147°E 148°E
29°S
0 30 km
(b)
0 30 kmFigure 22.15 (a) A map of 95 pastoral
holdings in New South Wales, Australia,
showing two sets of holdings needed torepresent all 17 ecosystem types at leastonce. Stars indicate a minimum set
identiﬁed by a complementarity algorithmthat selects sites with unique ecosystems,and then proceeds stepwise to select thesite with the rarest unrepresentedecosystem type. Shading indicates the setrequired if all holdings are scored accordingto the average rareness of the ecosystemtypes they contain. (b) A landscape ofconservation value for each holding
derived by predicting irreplaceability levels.(After Pressey et al. , 1993.)EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 650ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 651
and lizards in Australian reserves, and of large mammals in
national parks in the USA (Quinn & Harrison, 1988). It seemslikely that habitat heterogeneity is a general feature of con-siderable importance in determining species richness.
3A point of particular signiﬁcance is that local extinctions are
common events (see Section 7.5), and so recolonization of habi-tat fragments is critical for the survival of fragmented populations. Thus, we need to pay particular attention to thespatial relationships amongst fragments, including the provi-sion of dispersal corridors. There are potential disadvantages– for example, corridors could increase the correlation amongfragments of catastrophic effects such as the spread of ﬁre ordisease – but the arguments in favor are persuasive. Indeed, highrecolonization rates (even if this means conservation managers
themselves moving organisms around) may be indispensableto the success of conservation of endangered metapopulations(see Section 15.5.3). Note especially that human fragmentationof the landscape, producing subpopulations that are moreand more isolated, is likely to have had the strongest effecton populations with naturally low rates of dispersal. Thus, thewidespread declines of the world’s amphibians may be due,at least in part, to their poor potential for dispersal (Blausteinet al. , 1994).
22.4.2 Multipurpose reserve design
Many of the new generation of 
marine protected areas are designed asmultiple-use reserves, accommodatingmany different users (environmentalists,cultural harvesters, commercial ﬁshers, tourism operators, 
etc.) (Airame et al. , 2003). It is clear, too, that conservation and
sustainable use on land (forestry, agriculture) can often proceed
hand in hand as long as the planning has a scientiﬁc basis and thenegotiated objectives are clear (Margules & Pressey, 2000).
A good example of multipurpose design is provided by Villa
et al. (2002), who used a systematic approach to design one of
the ﬁrst marine reserve zoning plans in Italy. They involved allthe different interest groups (ﬁshing, recreation, conservation) in deﬁning priorities, and used a GIS (geographic information system) to map marine areas for different uses and degrees of protection. Italian law recognizes reserves with three levels of pro-tection: ‘integral’ reserves (only available for research), ‘general’reserves and the less restrictive ‘partial’ reserves. Villa et al. ’s start-
ing point was to accept ‘partial’ and ‘general’ reserves but to split
‘integral’ reserves into two categories: no-entry, no-take zones(where only nondestructive research is permitted) and publicentry, no-take zones, which allow visitors a full experience of thereserve, apart from exploitation. Permitted activities for the fourcategories are shown in Table 22.1.
The next step was to produce maps of 27 variables import-
ant to one or more interest groups. These included ﬁsh diversity,ﬁsh nursery areas, sites used by life history stages of key species(e.g. limpets, sea mammals, marine birds), archeological interest,
suitability for various forms of ﬁshing (e.g. traditional artisanal,commercial), suitability for various recreational activities (e.g.snorkeling, whale watching), tourist infrastructure and pollutionstatus. Planning sessions with each interest group yielded weight-ings or relative importance values for the variables. Taking theseinto account, ﬁve higher level maps were produced (using anapproach developed for economic analysis and urban planning
•• ••managing for
multiple objectives –beyond conservationNo-take, Entry, General Partial
Category Activity no-entry no-take reserve reserve
Research Nondestructive research Aa Aa A A
Sea access Sailing P L A A
Motor boating P P L L
Swimming P P A A
Staying Anchorage P P L L
Mooring P L Aa A
Recreation Diving P L Aa A
Guided tours P L Aa ARecreational ﬁshing P P L A
Exploitation Artisanal P P L L
Sport P P P LScuba P P P PCommercial ﬁshing P P P P
A, allowed without authorization; Aa, allowed upon authorization; L, subject to speciﬁc limitations;P, prohibited.Table 22.1 Activities permitted or
prohibited for each of four planned levels
of protection (from left to right in order of decreasing protection) for the AsinaraIsland National Marine Reserve of Italy.
(After Villa et al. , 2002.)EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 651652 CHAPTER 22
known as multiple-criteria analysis): (i) the natural value of the
marine environment (NVM – aggregating values related to bio-diversity, rarity and crucial habitats such as nursery areas); (ii) thenatural value of the coastal environment (NVC – aggregating values related to endemic coastal species including seabirds, 
and habitat suitable for the reintroduction of turtles and seals);(iii) the recreational activity value (RAV – aggregating values 
for all recreational activities); (iv) the commercial resource value(CRV – aggregating traditional ﬁshing sites plus other suitable areas); and (v) the ease of access value (EAV – aggregating marineaccess routes and harbors). Aggregated maps for NVM, NVC and
RAV are shown in Figure 22.16a–c.
•• ••AsinaraA1
A2
BBC
A2
A2
A2
Sardinia(d)Min Max(b)(c)
(a)
0 3 km
Figure 22.16 Maps of the natural value of (a) the marine environment (NVM), (b) the coastal environment (NVC) and (c) recreational
activity value (RAV) for areas around Asinara Island (the island land area is shown in the center in gray). Lighter shades of c olor represent
higher values. (d) Final zoning plan for the Asinara Island National Marine Reserve. A1, no-entry, no-take; A2, entry, no-take;  B, general
reserve; C, partial reserve. The inset map shows the location of the reserve in relation to the mainland of Italy. (After Villa  et al. , 2002.)EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 652ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 653
The ﬁnal stage was the production of a zoning plan. The
researchers sought to avoid complex zoning that would make 
management and enforcement difﬁcult and paid particular attention to the views of the various interest groups to reduceremaining conﬂicts to a minimum. The ﬁnal plan (Figure 22.16d)
had one no-entry, no-take zone (reﬂecting biological import-ance and relative remoteness), four entry, no-take zones to protect speciﬁc values such as endangered species (reﬂecting biological value but with easy access), two general reserve zones (to protect sensitive benthic assemblages, such as seagrassmeadows that suffer little from the permitted activities; seeTable 22.1) and one partial reserve zone as a buffer for adjacentreserve zones (in an area where traditional ﬁshing practices are compatible with conservation). The zoning proposal also
identiﬁed three channels providing maximum boat access withminimal environmental disturbance.
22.5 Triple bottom line of sustainability
The main emphasis up to this point has been on the use of 
ecological theory to help solve environmental problems andestablish strategies that are likely to be sustainable in the long term.However, we have already come across a variety of examples where ecological aspects of sustainability cannot be divorced
from economic (e.g. limited funds for conservation action) or social aspects (e.g. related to disease risk or the importance of involving diverse interest groups, including indigenous peoples,in resource management). Similar examples were also encounteredin the two earlier chapters dealing with ecological applications (e.g. Sections 7.2.3, 7.5.5.2, 7.5.6, 15.2.1, 15.2.3 and 15.3.9). Herewe deal more explicitly with the economic and sociopolitical threads of environmental sustainability.
22.5.1 Economic perspective
The importance of economics in
resource management is obvious foractivities such as harvest management
(see Section 15.3), agricultural management (including pest control; see Sections 15.2 and 22.2.1) and the use of scarce funds 
when planning conservation management and protected areas (seeSections 7.5 and 22.4). When it comes to conservation of species,biodiversity or ecosystems, however, it is more difﬁcult to assigneconomic value to the entities to be conserved. It is necessary todo this because of the economic arguments in favor of humanactivities that make conservation a necessity: agriculture, thefelling of trees, the harvesting of wild animal populations, theexploitation of minerals, the burning of fossil fuels, irrigation, the discharge of wastes and so on. While there are not really 
arguments against conservation, the case for conservation will be most likely to be effective if framed in cost–beneﬁt terms 
because governments determine their policies against a back-ground of the money they have to spend and the prioritiesaccepted by their electorates.
We ﬁrst consider how individual
species can be valued. There are threemain components: (i) the direct valueof the products that are harvested; (ii)the indirect value where aspects of biodiversity bring economicbeneﬁt without the need to consume the resource; and (iii) theethical value.
Many species are recognized as having actual direct value as
living resources; many more species are likely to have a potential
value which as yet remains untapped (Miller, 1988). Wild meatand plants remain a vital resource in many parts of the world,whilst most of the world’s food is derived from plants that were originally domesticated from wild plants in tropical and semiarid regions. In the future, wild strains of these species maybe needed for their genetic diversity in attempts to breed forimproved yield, pest resistance, drought resistance and so on, and quite different species of plants and animals may be foundthat are appropriate for domestication. In another context, we have seen in Section 15.2 the potential beneﬁts that could comefrom natural enemies if they can be used as biological control agents for pest species. Most natural enemies of most pests
remain unstudied and often unrecognized. Finally, about 40% of the prescription and nonprescription drugs used throughoutthe world have active ingredients extracted from plants and animals. Aspirin, probably the world’s most widely used drug, was derived originally from the leaves of the tropical willow, Salix
alba. The nine-banded armadillo ( Dasypus novemcinctus ) has been
used to study leprosy and prepare a vaccine for the disease; theFlorida manatee ( Trichechus manatus ), an endangered mammal,
is being used to help understand hemophilia. These are by no 
means isolated cases and a large-scale worldwide search is under-way to discover organisms with new medicinal applications. The vast majority of the world’s animals and plants have yet tobe screened – the potential value of any that go extinct can neverbe realized. By conserving species, we maintain their option value– the potential to provide beneﬁt in the future.
Nonconsumptive, indirect economic value is sometimes 
relatively easy to calculate. For example, a multitude of wild 
insect species are responsible for pollinating crop plants. The value of these pollinators could be assigned either by calculatingthe extent to which the insects increase the value of the crop orby the expenditure necessary to hire hives of honeybees to do thepollinating (Primack, 1993). In a related context, the monetary value of recreation and ecotourism, often called amenity value,is becoming ever more considerable. On a smaller scale, a multi-tude of natural history ﬁlms, books and educational programs are ‘consumed’ annually without harming the wildlife upon
which they are based.
•• ••importance of the
economic perspectivehow can species beassigned economicvalue?EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 653••654 CHAPTER 22
The ﬁnal category is ethical value. Many people believe that
there are ethical grounds for conservation, arguing that every
species is of value in its own right, and would be of equal valueeven if people were not here to appreciate or exploit it. From this perspective even species with no conceivable economic
value require protection.
Of these three main reasons for conserving biodiversity, the
ﬁrst two, direct and indirect economic value, have a truly object-ive basis. The third, ethics, on the other hand, is subjective andis faced with the problem that a subjective reason will inevitablycarry less weight with those not committed to the conservationistcause.
It is clear that assigning a value to
species is not always straightforward.
However, even more ingenuity isrequired to assign value to beneﬁts thataccrue to people from natural ecosys-tems as a whole – ecosystem services
such as the production of wild species for food, ﬁber and pharma-ceuticals, maintenance of the chemical quality of natural waters,buffering of communities against ﬂoods and droughts, ecosystemresistance to pest invasion, protection and maintenance of soils,regulation of local and global climate, the breakdown of organicand inorganic wastes, recreational opportunities, etc. The valueof all ecosystem services was estimated globally at US$33 trillionper year (Costanza et al. , 1997), updated for the year 2000 to 
US$38 trillion per year, an amount that is similar to the gross
national product of all the world’s economies (Balmford et al. , 
2002).
Such gross estimates are fraught with difﬁculty and have 
been criticized, partly because of the assumption that limited local knowledge can be safely extrapolated to a global sum asthough demand and value are the same in different parts of theworld. Balmford et al. (2002) argue that the value of retaining 
habitat in a relatively undisturbed condition would be best determined by estimating the differences in beneﬁt from relativelyintact and exploited versions of a particular ecosystem. They gobeyond the mere calculation of private beneﬁt to the exploitersto incorporate the dollar values of diverse public beneﬁts ofecosystem services. The results of three case studies are presentedin Figure 22.17. In each case, the estimates of private beneﬁt andecosystem services are for 30–50-year periods.
The ﬁrst case study deals with trop-
ical forest in Cameroon and compareslow-impact forestry, conversion tosmall-scale agriculture and conversionto oil palm and rubber plantations. Thevalue of all ecosystem services com-
bined was highest under sustainable forestry; here ecosystemservices included the control of sedimentation, ﬂood preven-tion, carbon sequestration by the vegetation (i.e. contributing to a reduction of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and thus counteracting global warming) and a range of species values 
(see Section 7.5). Overall the total economic value (combining private beneﬁt with the value of ecosystem services, expressed asnet present value – NPV) over 32 years for low-impact forestrywas 18% greater than for small-scale farming, while plantations
actually made a net loss when both private beneﬁt and ecosystemservices were taken into account.
Analysis of a mangrove ecosystem in Thailand showed that
the private beneﬁt from shrimp farming shrank almost to nothingwhen the economics took into account the loss of ecosystem services from timber and nontimber products, charcoal, offshoreﬁsheries and storm protection associated with the natural eco-system (Figure 22.17b). The total value of intact mangrovesexceeded that of shrimp farming by 70%.
Finally, the draining of freshwater marshes often produces 
private beneﬁt (sometimes, as in this Canadian example, in large
part because of drainage subsidies provided by the government).However, ecosystem services from intact wetland include hunt-ing, trapping and angling and when the dollar values of these aretaken into account the overall economic value of intact wetlandexceeded converted land by about 60% (Figure 22.17c).
These analyses prompted Balmford et al. (2002) to suggest 
that a large-scale expansion of the world’s network of protectedareas (costing as much as US$45 billion per year) would actuallyrepresent a ‘strikingly good bargain’ in comparison to the US$38 trillion per year that ecosystem services may be worth.
22.5.2 Social perspectives
In his analysis of the history of ﬁsheries, Pitcher (2001) points 
out how successive technological advances have driven the inexorable decline in abundance, diversity and representation of high-value species in catches (Figure 22.18). He identiﬁedthree stages that can be recognized during depletion episodes: 
the ﬁrst stage is ecological, comprising depletion and localextinction; the second is economic, comprising a positive feed-back loop between increased catching power and depletion,driven by the need to repay money; and the third is social, com-prising a shifting baseline in what each generation considersacceptable (or primal) abundance and diversity. It is possible to devise sustainable regimes at any stage but this has not often happened. At the current stage, the question arises shouldmanagers simply devise a sustainable management policy or
actually attempt to rebuild the ﬁshery? Pitcher challenges com-munities to attempt a ‘back to the future’ strategy, in which models of past ecosystems (constructed on the basis of local and traditional environmental knowledge) are subjected to eco-nomic comparison with current and alternative ecosystems. Hesuggests that large no-take reserves and the reintroduction of high-value species will ﬁgure prominently in the restoration ofsuch historic ecosystems.
••valuing the
functioning ofecosystems:‘ecosystem services’
including ecosystemservices in thevaluation of naturalresourcesEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 654••ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 655
Managers can beneﬁt from a coa-
lescence of the economic approach of
Balmford et al. (2002) and the social
approach of Villa et al. (2002), where
diverse local interest groups were involved in developing a 
management strategy. Aboriginal people can be expected to playa central role in sustainability developments in their territories not least because of their extensive knowledge of both the con-temporary and historical situation. We have referred frequently in this chapter to lessons to be learnt from indigenous people andthe importance of their involvement in resource management (benzoin gardening in Sumatra, ﬁre management by Australianaborigines, Maori development of river health indicators). Maorihave also been one of the groups, along with commercial and 
recreational ﬁshers, tourism operators and environmentalists,comprising the Guardians of Fiordland’s Fisheries and MarineEnvironment (GOFF). Over 3 years, they developed a zoning plan for New Zealand’s Fiordland area on the west coast of NewZealand’s South Island (Teirney, 2003). This was an entirely bottom-up effort by the local community (not directed top-downby governmental or nongovernmental agencies) and the diversegroups have worked face-to-face from the beginning. While challenging to manage (a skilled facilitator was involved), thisapproach provides a model for minimizing conﬂict, stimulatingreciprocal learning and formulating objectives for sustainableecosystem use that have proved difﬁcult to achieve by top-downmeans. The New Zealand government has committed itself to
implement the GOFF plan.
22.5.3 Putting it all together
In the past, the importance of eco-
system services was only appreciatedafter they had been lost. However, asecological understanding has increasedand now the economic signiﬁcance is
appreciated, sociopolitical change has become evident in a num-ber of ways. In Costa Rica, for example, the government has beenpaying landowners since 1997 for ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration, protection of catchment areas, biodiversityand scenic beauty (payments of about US$50 ha
−1, which come
mainly from taxes on fossil fuels) (Daily et al. , 2000). Private enter-
prise has also begun to respond. Thus, a company called Earth
Sanctuaries Ltd became the world’s ﬁrst conservation companyto go public when it was listed on the Australian Stock Market.
It bought and restored land, earning income from tourism and wildlife sales. The company lobbied and won a change inAustralian accounting law so that it could include its rare nativeanimals as assets (Daily et al. , 2000). Such approaches, involving
far-reaching political change, require price tags to be placed onnatural ecosystems.
••community action . . .
and the role ofaboriginal people(a)
NPV (US$ ha–1)
0
Reduced-
impact
logging100020003000
Small-
scale
farming Plantation–1000
–2000Tropical forest, Cameroon
(b) NPV (US$ ha–1)
0
Intact80,000
Shrimp
farmingMangrove, Thailand
60,000
40,00020,000
(c)
NPV (US$ ha–1)
0
Intact10,000
Intensive
farmingWetland, Canada
800040002000
Figure 22.17 The marginal values of retaining or converting
natural habitats expressed as net present value (NPV; in terms of
US$ in the year 2000). (a) Tropical forest in Cameroon – estimatesfor three land uses over a 32-year time period, using a discountrate of 10%. Discounting allows for the fact that in economic
terms each tree (or ﬁsh or bird) in the hand now is worth more than an equivalent bird some time in the future (see Section 15.3.8). The discount rate used was that adopted by theoriginal researchers. (b) Mangrove in Thailand – estimates forintact mangrove forest and for conversion to shrimp farming over a 30-year period with a 6% discount rate. (c) Wetland inCanada – estimates for intact wetland and for conversion tointensive farming over a 50-year period with a discount rate of 4%. (After Balmford et al. , 2002; from original studies by 
G. Yaron, S. Sathirathai and W. van Vuuren & P. Roy,
respectively.)applying a triple
bottom line approach . . .EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 655••656 CHAPTER 22
••Biodiversity or abundance index →
Pleistocene Recorded history Present day Near futureTime →Hook, harpoon, trap
Seine, drift net, fish wheel
Beam trawl Trajectories of sustainability
(option at any level)
Rebuild
Sustain
DepleteFreezer trawler, power block, purse seine
Rock-hopper trawl, troll, jigger, drift netSteam trawl
Figure 22.18 Representation of the
reduction in abundance and diversity 
of ﬁsh catches since prehistory. Thedownward steps depict serial depletion as new ﬁshing technologies are invented.
Horizontal gray arrows representsustainable management regimes, which in theory could be devised at any stage.Future options are indicated by the three-way arrow. (After Pitcher, 2001.)
(a)CO2 concentration (ppm)
Year2000300500700900
2050 2100(b)CH4 concentration (ppb)
Year200015003500
2050 21002500
(c)N2O concentration (ppb)
Year2000300500
2050 2100400(d)Temperature change (°C)
Year200006
2050 210024Figure 22.19 Predicted changes in
concentration in the atmosphere of 
(a) carbon dioxide, (b) methane, (c) nitrousoxide and (d) predicted temperaturechanges to 2100 based on three scenarios.
The solid lines show the predicted patternsfor a future world of very rapid economicgrowth, a global population that peaksmidcentury, the rapid increase of moreefﬁcient technologies, and a populationthat does not rely heavily on any oneparticular energy source. The dotted linesshow patterns for a similar scenario butone where energy use is fossil-fuel
intensive (as it has been until now). Thedashed lines are for a more optimistic andsustainable scenario with a similar patternof population growth but with a rapidchange toward a service and informationeconomy, with reductions in the use ofmaterials and the introduction of clean and resource-efﬁcient technologies. (AfterIPCC, 2001.)EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 656•• ••ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS: MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITIES AND ECOSYSTEMS 657
As with other pressing problems
where the application of ecological
knowledge is important, dealing with
future climate change also requires a triple bottom line approachthat brings together ecological, economic and social perspectives
for a sustainable future. Estimates of future greenhouse gasemissions, the concentrations to be expected in the atmosphere,and the resulting changes to global temperature vary considerably.Figure 22.19 shows predicted patterns of increase, and in some caseseventual decreases, based on a variety of scenarios related to con-ceivable values for population increase, potential changes in theuse of various energy sources, and likely technological advances.
A further example of predicted
global change concerns the signiﬁcant
threats posed to ecosystems around theworld by increasing agricultural devel-opment. Given the projected increase in
human population, the associated impacts of increased erosion,unsustainability of water supply, salinization and desertiﬁcation,excess plant nutrients ﬁnding their way into waterways, and theunwanted consequences of chemical pesticides will all increaseover the next 50 years as more land is converted to grow cropsand pasture (Figure 22.20). To control the environmental impactsof agricultural expansion, we will need scientiﬁc and technologicaladvances as well as the implementation of effective governmentpolicies. Once again sustainability requires its three faces – ecology,economics and sociopolitics.The range of problems facing the human race in the early 
years of a new millennium are unprecedented, and most of thoseproblems are – in the broadest sense – ecological. Philosophersmay have contemplated ‘Man’s place in the world’ for genera-tions, but the question has now taken on a new and much morepractical meaning. The luxury of asking ‘What does it all mean?’is being replaced by the urgent ‘What are we to do?’ The clos-ing sections of this book have made the point that ecologists cannot address this question alone – and nobody would let us,even if we wanted to! But equally, the question cannot beaddressed without the intimate involvement of those with deep,scientiﬁc, ecological understanding. Ecologists of the future face two challenges, equally urgent: to advance our science, and
to involve our science thoroughly in local, national and global policies. We must believe that those challenges will be met: to doubt it would only paralyze us.
Summary
In this last of the trilogy of chapters (Chapters 7, 15 and 22), 
we deal with the application of theory related to succession, food webs, ecosystem functioning and biodiversity.
Managers need to be aware that community composition is
hardly ever static. Management objectives that seem to require
stasis – the annual production of an agricultural crop, the restora-tion of a particular combination of species, the long-term survivalof an endangered species – are likely to fail unless succession istaken into account.
Every species of concern to managers has its complement of
competitors, mutualists, predators and parasites, and an appreci-ation of such complex interactions is often needed to guide management action in diverse ﬁelds including human disease, conservation, harvesting and biosecurity.
Nutrient runoff from agricultural land, together with treated
or untreated human sewage, can upset the functioning of aquatic
ecosystems through the process of cultural eutrophication, increas-ing productivity, changing abiotic conditions and altering speciescomposition. One potential solution is the ‘biomanipulation’ oflake food webs to reverse some of the adverse effects of nutrientenrichment. Moreover, knowledge of terrestrial ecosystem func-tioning can help determine optimal farm practices, where cropproductivity involves minimal input of nutrients. The setting ofecosystem restoration objectives (and the ability to monitor whe-ther these are achieved) requires the development of tools to meas-ure the ‘ecosystem health’ of terrestrial and aquatic environments.
Much of the planet’s surface is used for, or adversely affected
by, human habitation, industry, mining, food production and 
harvesting. Thus, there is a pressing need to use our knowledgeof the distribution of biodiversity to design networks of reservedland and water, whether speciﬁcally for conservation or for mul-tiple uses, such as harvesting, tourism and conservation combined.PastureN fertilizersProjected increase (%)
P fertilizers
Irrigation
Pesticides
Cropland150
100
50
0
Agricultural variable
Figure 22.20 Projected increases in nitrogen (N) and phosphorus
(P) fertilizers, irrigated land, pesticide use and total areas under
crops and pasture by the years 2020 (orange bars) and 2050 (graybars). (From Laurance, 2001; data from Tilman et al. , 2001.)
. . . to global climate
change . . .
. . . and to increasingagriculturaldevelopmentEIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 657658 CHAPTER 22
We ﬁnish by emphasizing a reality that applied ecologists can-
not ignore. The application of ecological theory never proceeds
in isolation. First, there are inevitably economic considerations:how can farmers maximize production while minimizing adverseecological consequences; how can biodiversity and ecosystem 
functioning be evaluated alongside proﬁts from forestry or mining;how can returns be maximized from limited conservation dollars?Second, there are almost always sociopolitical considerations:
what methods can be used to reconcile interested parties; shouldsustainable management be set in law or encouraged by educa-tion; how can the needs and perspectives of indigenous peoplebe taken into account? These issues come together in the so-called
triple bottom line of sustainability, with its ecological, economic
and sociopolitical perspectives.
••EIPC22  10/24/05  2:21 PM  Page 658••References
Aber, J.D. (1992) Nitrogen cycling and nitrogen saturation in tem-
perate forest ecosystems. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 7,
220–224.
Aber, J.D. & Federer, C.A. (1992) A generalised, lumped-parameter
model of photosynthesis, evapotranspiration and net primary
production in temperate and boreal forest ecosystems. Oecologia ,
92, 463–474.
Abrahamson, W.G. (1975) Reproductive strategies in dewberries.
Ecology , 56, 721–726.
Abrams, P. (1976) Limiting similarity and the form of the com-
petition coefﬁcient. Theoretical Population Biology , 8, 356–375.
Abrams, P. (1983) The theory of limiting similarity. Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics , 14, 359–376.
Abrams, P.A. (1990) Ecological vs evolutionary consequences of
competition. Oikos , 57, 147–151.
Abrams, P. (1997) Anomalous predictions of ratio-dependent models
of predation. Oikos , 80, 163–171.
Abramsky, Z. & Rosenzweig, M.L. (1983) Tilman’s predicted 
productivity–diversity relationship shown by desert rodents.
Nature , 309, 150–151.
Abramsky, Z. & Sellah, C. (1982) Competition and the role of habitat
selection in Gerbillus allenbyi and Meriones tristrami : a removal 
experiment. Ecology , 63, 1242–1247.
Adams, E.S. (2001) Approaches to the study of territory size and shape.
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics , 32, 277–303.
Agrawal, A.A. (1998) Induced responses to herbivory and increased
plant performance. Science , 279, 1201–1202.
Airame, S., Dugan, J.E., Lafferty, K.D., Leslie, H., McArdle, D.A. 
& Warner, R.R. (2003) Applying ecological criteria to marine reserve design: a case study from the California Channel Islands.Ecological Applications , 13 (Suppl.), S170–S184.
Akçakaya, H.R. (1992) Population viability analysis and risk assessment.
In: Proceedings of Wildlife 2001: Populations (D.R. McCullough, ed.),
pp. 148–158. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Albertson, F.W. (1937) Ecology of mixed prairie in west central Kansas.
Ecological Monographs , 7, 481–547.Albon, S.D., Stien, A., Irvine, R.J., Langvatn, R., Ropstad, E. &
Halvorsen, O. (2002) The role of parasites in the dynamics of a
reindeer population. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London,
Series B , 269, 1625–1632.
Albrecht, M. & Gotelli, N.J. (2001) Spatial and temporal niche parti-
tioning in grassland ants. Oecologia , 126, 134–141.
Alexander, R. McN. (1991) Optimization of gut structure and diet 
for higher vertebrate herbivores. In: The Evolutionary Interaction
of Animals and Plants ( J.L. Harper & J.H. Lawton, eds), pp. 73–79.
The Royal Society, London; also in Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, Series B , 333, 249–255.
Allen, K.R. (1972) Further notes on the assessment of Antarctic ﬁn whale
stocks. Report of the International Whaling Commission , 22, 43–53.
Allison, M.J. (1984) Microbiology of the rumen and small and 
large intestines. In: Dukes’ Physiology of Domestic Animals, 10th 
edn (M.J. Swenson, ed.), pp. 340–350. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, NY.
Alonso, A., Dallmeier, F., Granek, E. & Raven, P. (2001) Connecting
with the Tapestry of Life . Smithsonian Institution/Monitoring and
Assessment of Biodiversity Program and President’s Committeeof Advisors on Science and Technology, Washington, DC.
Alphey, T.W. (1970) Studies on the distribution and site location of
Nippostrongylus brasiliensis within the small intestine of laboratory
rats. Parasitology , 61, 449–460.
Amarasekare, P. & Possingham, H. (2001) Patch dynamics and
metapopulation theory: the case of successional species. Journal
of Theoretical Biology
, 209, 333–344.
Anderson, J.M. (1978) Inter- and intrahabitat relationships between
woodland Cryptostigmata species diversity and diversity of soil
and litter micro-habitats. Oecologia , 32, 341–348.
Anderson, J.M. (1987) Forest soils as short, dry rivers: effects of
invertebrates on transport processes. Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft
fur Okologie , 17, 33–45.
Anderson, R.M. (1981) Population ecology of infectious disease agents.
In: Theoretical Ecology: principles and applications , 2nd edn (R.M. May,
ed.), pp. 318–355. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 659660 REFERENCES
Anderson, R.M. (1982) Epidemiology. In: Modern Parasitology (F.E.G.
Cox, ed.), pp. 205–251. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Anderson, R.M. (1991) Populations and infectious diseases: ecology
or epidemiology? Journal of Animal Ecology , 60, 1–50.
Anderson, R.M. & May, R.M. (1978) Regulation and stability of host–
parasite population interactions. I. Regulatory processes. Journal
of Animal Ecology , 47, 219–249.
Anderson, R.M. & May, R.M. (1991) Infectious Diseases of Humans:
dynamics and control . Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Anderson, R.M., Jackson, H.C., May, R.M. & Smith, A.D.M. (1981)
Population dynamics of fox rabies in Europe. Nature , 289, 765–
771.
Andrewartha, H.G. & Birch, L.C. (1954) The Distribution and Abundance
of Animals . University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Andrews, P., Lorde, J.M. & Nesbit Evans, E.M. (1979) Patterns of 
ecological diversity in fossil and mammalian faunas. Biological Journal
of the Linnean Society , 11, 177–205.
Angel, M.V. (1994) Spatial distribution of marine organisms: patterns
and processes. In: Large Scale Ecology and Conservation Biology
(P.J. Edwards, R.M. May & N.R. Webb, eds), pp. 59–109. Blackwell,
Oxford.
Angermeier, P.L. (1995) Ecological attributes of extinction-prone species:
loss of freshwater ﬁshes of Virginia. Conservation Biology , 9, 143–158.
Antonovics, J. & Alexander, H.M. (1992) Epidemiology of anther-
smut infection of Silene alba ( =Silene latifolia) caused by Ustilago
violacea : patterns of spore deposition in experimental populations.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 250, 157–163.
Antonovics, J. & Bradshaw, A.D. (1970) Evolution in closely adjacent
plant populations. VIII. Clinical patterns at a mine boundary.Heredity , 25, 349–362.
ANZECC (Australia and New Zealand Environment and Conservation
Council) (1998) National Koala Conservation Strategy . Environment
Australia, Canberra.
Arain, M.A., Black, T.A., Barr, A.G. et al. (2002) Effects of seasonal
and interannual climate variability on net ecosystem productivityof boreal deciduous and conifer forests. Canadian Journal of Forestry
Research , 32, 878–891.
Araujo, M.B. & Williams, P.H. (2001) The bias of complementarity
hotspots toward marginal populations. Conservation Biology , 15,
1710–1720.
Arditi, R. & Ginzburg, L.R. (1989) Coupling in predator–prey dynamics:
ratio dependence. Journal of Theoretical Biology , 139, 311–326.
Armbruster, P. & Lande, R. (1992) A population viability analysis for
African elephant ( Loxodonta africana ): how big should reserves be?
Conservation Biology , 7, 602–610.
Ashmole, N.P. (1971) Sea bird ecology and the marine environment.
In: Avian Biology , Vol. 1 (D.S. Farner & J.R. King, eds), pp. 224–
286. Academic Press, New York.
Aston, J.L. & Bradshaw, A.D. (1966) Evolution in closely adjacent plant
populations. II. Agrostis stolonifera in maritime habitats. Heredity ,
21, 649–664.
Atkinson, D., Ciotti, B.J. & Montagnes, D.J.S. (2003) Protists decrease
in size linearly with temperature: ca. 2.5% °C
−1. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, Series B , 270, 2605–2611.Atkinson, W.D. & Shorrocks, B. (1981) Competition on a divided and
ephemeral resource: a simulation model. Journal of Animal Ecology ,
50, 461–471.
Audesirk, T. & Audesirk, G. (1996) Biology: life on earth . Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Ausmus, B.S., Edwards, N.T. & Witkamp, M. (1976) Microbial
immobilisation of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium:implications for forest ecosystem processes. In: The Role of
Terrestrial and Aquatic Organisms in Decomposition Processes ( J.M.
Anderson & A. MacFadyen, eds), pp. 397–416. Blackwell ScientiﬁcPublications, Oxford.
Ayal, Y. (1994) Time-lags in insect response to plant productivity:
signiﬁcance for plant–insect interactions in deserts. Ecological
Entomology , 19, 207–214.
Ayala, F.J. (1969) Evolution of ﬁtness. IV. Genetic evolution of inter-
speciﬁc competitive ability in Drosophila. Genetics , 61, 737–47.
Bach, C.E. (1994) Effects of herbivory and genotype on growth 
and survivorship of sand-dune willow ( Salix cordata ). Ecological
Entomology , 19, 303–309.
Badger, M.R., Andrews, T.J., Whitney, S.M. et al. (1997) The diversity
and coevolution of Rubisco, plastids, pyrenoids, and chloroplast-based CO
2-concentrating mechanisms in algae. Canadian Journal
of Botany , 76, 1052–1071.
Baker, A.J.M. (2002) The use of tolerant plants and hyperaccumula-
tors. In: The Restoration and Management of Derelict Land: modern
approaches (M.H. Wong & A.D. Bradshaw, eds), pp. 138–148. World
Scientiﬁc Publishing, Singapore.
Bakker, K. (1961) An analysis of factors which determine success 
in competition for food among larvae of Drosophila melanogaster.
Archieves Néerlandaises de Zoologie , 14, 200–281.
Baldwin, I.T. (1998) Jasmonate-induced responses are costly but
beneﬁt plants under attack in native populations. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science of the USA , 95, 8113–8118.
Balmford, A., Bruner, A., Cooper, P. et al. (2002) Economic reasons
for conserving wild nature. Science , 297, 950–953.
Balmford, A., Green, R.E. & Jenkins, M. (2003) Measuring the
changing state of nature. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 18,
326–330.
Baltensweiler, W., Benz, G., Bovey, P. & Delucchi, V. (1977) 
Dynamics of larch budmoth populations. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics , 22, 79–100.
Barbosa, P. (ed.) (1998) Conservation Biological Control . Academic Press,
San Diego.
Baross, J.A. & Deming, J.W. (1995) Growth at high temperatures: 
isolation and taxonomy, physiology, ecology. In: Microbiology of
Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vent Habitats (D.M. Karl, ed.), pp. 169–218.
CRC Press, New York.
Barrett, K., Wait, D. & Anderson, W.B. (2003) Small island bio-
geography in the Gulf of California: lizards, the subsidized islandbiogeography hypothesis, and the small island effect. Journal of
Biogeography , 30, 1575–1581.
Bascompte, J. & Sole, R.V. (1996) Habitat fragmentation and 
extinction thresholds in spatially explicit models. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 65, 465–473.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 660REFERENCES 661
Batzli, G.O. (1983) Responses of arctic rodent populations to nutritional
factors. Oikos , 40, 396–406.
Batzli, G.O. (1993) Food selection in lemmings. In: The Biology of
Lemmings (N.C. Stenseth & R.A. Ims, eds), pp. 281–302. Academic
Press, London.
Bayliss, P. (1987) Kangaroo dynamics. In: Kangaroos, their Ecology 
and Management in the Sheep Rangelands of Australia (G. Caughley,
N. Shepherd & J. Short, eds), pp. 119–134. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Bazzaz, F.A. (1979) The physiological ecology of plant succession.
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics , 10, 351–371.
Bazzaz, F.A. (1990) The response of natural ecosystems to the rising
global CO2levels. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics , 21,
167–196.
Bazzaz, F.A. & Williams, W.E. (1991) Atmospheric CO2concentra-
tions within a mixed forest: implications for seedling growth. Ecology ,
72, 12–16.
Bazzaz, F.A., Miao, S.L. & Wayne, P.M. (1993) CO2-induced growth
enhancements of co-occurring tree species decline at different 
rates. Oecologia , 96, 478–482.
Beaumont, L.J. & Hughes, L. (2002) Potential changes in the dis-
tributions of latitudinally restricted Australian butterﬂy species 
in response to climate change. Global Change Biology , 8, 954–
971.
Becker, P. (1992) Colonization of islands by carnivorous and herbivor-
ous Heteroptera and Coleoptera: effects of island area, plant
species richness, and ‘extinction’ rates. Journal of Biogeography , 19,
163–171.
Becker, P. (2000) Competition in the regeneration niche between
conifers and angiosperms: Bond’s slow seedling hypothesis. Func-
tional Ecology , 14, 401–412.
Beddington, J.R., Free, C.A. & Lawton, J.H. (1978) Modelling bio-
logical control: on the characteristics of successful natural enemies.Nature , 273, 513–519.
Beebee, T.J.C. (1991) Puriﬁcation of an agent causing growth 
inhibition in anuran larvae and its identiﬁcation as a unicellularunpigmented alga. Canadian Journal of Zoology , 69, 2146–2153.
Begon, M. (1976) Temporal variations in the reproductive condition
of Drosophila obscura Fallén and D. subobscura Collin. Oecologia , 23,
31–47.
Begon, M. & Bowers, R.G. (1995) Beyond host–pathogen dynamics.
In: Ecology of Infectious Diseases in Natural Populations (B.T. Grenfell
& A.P. Dobson, eds), pp. 478–509. Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, UK.
Begon, M. & Wall, R. (1987) Individual variation and competitor 
coexistence: a model. Functional Ecology , 1, 237–241.
Begon, M., Bennett, M., Bowers, R.G., French, N.P., Hazel, S.M. &
Turner, J. (2002) A clariﬁcation of transmission terms in host–microparasite models: numbers, densities and areas. Epidemiology
and Infection , 129, 147–153.
Begon, M., Feore, S.M., Bown, K., Chantrey, J., Jones, T. & Bennett, M.
(1998) Population and transmission dynamics of cowpox virus in bank voles: testing fundamental assumptions. Ecology Letters , 
1, 82–86.Begon, M., Firbank, L. & Wall, R. (1986) Is there a self-thinning rule
for animal populations? Oikos , 46, 122–124.
Begon, M., Harper, J.L. & Townsend, C.R. (1990) Ecology: indi-
viduals, populations and communities , 2nd edn. Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, Oxford.
Begon, M., Sait, S.M. & Thompson, D.J. (1995) Persistence of a 
predator–prey system: refuges and generation cycles? Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 260, 131–137.
Begon, M., Sait, S.M. & Thompson, D.J. (1996) Predator–prey cycles
with period shifts between two- and three-species systems. Nature ,
381, 311–315.
Behnke, J.M., Bayer, A., Sinski, E. & Wakelin, D. (2001) Interactions
involving intestinal nematodes of rodents: experimental and ﬁeld
studies. Parasitology , 122, S39–S49.
Bell, D.T. (2001) Ecological response syndromes in the ﬂora of
southwestern Western Austalia: ﬁre resprouters versus reseeders.
The Botanical Review , 67, 417–441.
Bell, G. & Koufopanou, V. (1986) The cost of reproduction. Oxford
Surveys in Evolutionary Biology , 3, 83–131.
Bellows, T.S. Jr. (1981) The descriptive properties of some models
for density dependence. Journal of Animal Ecology , 50, 139–156.
Belt, T. (1874) The Naturalist in Nicaragua . J.M. Dent, London.
Belyea, L.R. & Lancaster, J. (1999) Assembly rules within a contingent
ecology. Oikos , 86, 402–416.
Benke, A.C., Wallace, J.B., Harrison, J.W. & Koebel, J.W. (2001) 
Food web quantiﬁcation using secondary production analysis: 
predaceous invertebrates of the snag habitat in a subtropicalriver. Freshwater Biology , 46, 329–346.
Bennet, K.D. (1986) The rate of spread and population increase of
forest trees during the postglacial. 
Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, Series B , 314, 523–531; and in Quantitative
Aspects of the Ecology of Biological Invasions (H. Kornberg & M.H.
Williamson, eds), pp. 21–27. The Royal Society, London.
Benson, J.F. (1973a) The biology of Lepidoptera infesting stored
products, with special reference to population dynamics. Biological
Reviews , 48, 1–26.
Benson, J.F. (1973b) Population dynamics of cabbage root ﬂy in
Canada and England. Journal of Applied Ecology , 10, 437–446.
Benton, T.G. & Grant, A. (1999) Elasticity analysis as an important
tool in evolutionary and population ecology. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 14, 467–471.
Bergelson, J.M. (1985) A mechanistic interpretation of prey selec-
tion by Anax junius larvae (Odonata: Aeschnidae). Ecology , 66,
1699–1705.
Bergelson, J. (1994) The effects of genotype and the environment on
costs of resistance in lettuce. American Naturalist , 143, 349–359.
Berger, J. (1990) Persistence of different-sized populations: an empir-
ical assessment of rapid extinctions in bighorn sheep. Conservation
Biology , 4, 91–98.
Bergman, C.M., Fryxell, J.M. & Gates, C.C. (2000) The effect of tissue
complexity and sward height on the functional response of woodbison. Functional Ecology , 14, 61–69.
Berner, E.K. & Berner, R.A. (1987) The Global Water Cycle: geochemistry
and environment . Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 661662 REFERENCES
Bernstein, C., Kacelnik, A. & Krebs, J.R. (1988) Individual decisions and
the distribution of predators in a patchy environment. Journal of
Animal Ecology , 57, 1007–1026.
Bernstein, C., Kacelnik, A. & Krebs, J.R. (1991) Individual decisions
and the distribution of predators in a patchy environment. II. 
The inﬂuence of travel costs and structure of the environment.Journal of Animal Ecology , 60, 205–225.
Berry, J.A. & Björkman, O. (1980) Photosynthetic response and
adaptation to temperature in higher plants. Annual Review of Plant
Physiology , 31, 491–543.
Berryman, A.A. (ed.) (2002) Population Cycles: the case for trophic inter-
actions . Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bertness, M.D., Leonard, G.H., Levin, J.M., Schmidt, P.R. &
Ingraham, A.O. (1999) Testing the relative contribution of positive
and negative interactions in rocky intertidal communities. Ecology ,
80, 2711–2726.
Berven, K.A. (1995) Population regulation in the wood frog, Rana 
sylvatica , from three diverse geographic localities. Australian Journal
of Ecology , 20, 385–392.
Beven, G. (1976) Changes in breeding bird populations of an oak-wood
on Bookham Common, Surrey, over twenty-seven years. London
Naturalist , 55, 23–42.
Beverton, R.J.H. (1993) The Rio Convention and rational harvesting
of natural ﬁsh resources: the Barents Sea experience in context.In: Norway/UNEP Expert Conference on Biodiversity (O.T. Sandlund
& P.J. Schei, eds), pp. 44–63. DN/NINA, Trondheim.
Bibby, C.J. (1998) Selecting areas for conservation. In: Conservation
Science and Action (W.J. Sutherland, ed.), pp. 176–201. Blackwell
Science, Oxford.
Bidle, K.D. & Azam, F. (2001) Bacterial control of silicon regenera-
tion from diatom detritus: signiﬁcance of bacterial ectohydrolasesand species identity. Limnology and Oceanography , 46, 1606–1623.
Bigger, M. (1976) Oscillations of tropical insect populations. Nature ,
259, 207–209.
Biggins, D.E. & Kosoy, M.Y. (2001) Inﬂuences of introduced plague
on North American mammals: implications from ecology of plaguein Asia. Journal of Mammalogy , 82, 906–916.
Bignell, D.E. (1989) Relative assimilations of carbon-14-labeled
microbial tissues and carbon-14-labeled plant ﬁber ingested withleaf litter by the millipede Glomeris marginata under experimental
conditions. Soil Biology and Biochemistry , 21, 819–828.
Björnhag, G. (1994) Adaptations in the large intestine allowing small
animals to eat ﬁbrous food. In: The Digestive System in Mammals.
Food, Form and Function (D.J. Chivers & P. Langer, eds), pp. 287–
312. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Bjørnstad, O.N. & Grenfell, B.T. (2001) Noisy clockwork: time series
analysis of population ﬂuctuations in animals. Science , 293, 638–643.
Bjørnstad, O.N., Falck, W. & Stenseth, N.C. (1995) A geographic 
gradient in small rodent density ﬂuctuations: a statistical modellingapproach. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 262,
127–133.
Bjørnstad, O.N., Sait, S.M., Stenseth, N.C., Thompson, D.J. &
Begon, M. (2001) The impact of specialized enemies on thedimensionality of host dynamics. Nature , 409, 1001–1006.Black, J.N. (1963) The interrelationship of solar radiation and leaf area
index in determining the rate of dry matter production of swards
of subterranean clover ( Trifolium subterraneum ). Australian Journal
of Agricultural Research , 14, 20–38.
Black, T.A., Chen, W.J., Barr, A.G. et al. (2000) Increased carbon 
sequestration by a boreal deciduous forest in years with a warm
spring. Geophysical Research Letters , 27, 1271–1274.
Blackburn, T.M. & Gaston, K.J. (eds) (2003) Macroecology: concepts and
consequences . Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Blackford, J.C., Allen, J.I. & Gilbert, F.J. (2004) Ecosystem dynamics
at six contrasting sites: a generic modelling study. 
Journal of Marine
Systems , 52, 191–215.
Blaustein, A.R., Wake, D.B. & Sousa, W.P. (1994) Amphibian declines:
judging stability, persistence, and susceptibility of populations tolocal and global extinctions. Conservation Biology , 8, 60–71.
Blueweiss, L., Fox, H., Kudzma, V., Nakashima, D., Peters, R. & Sams,
S. (1978) Relationships between body size and some life historyparameters. Oecologia , 37, 257–272.
Bobbink, R., Boxman, D., Fremstad, E., Heil, G., Houdijk, A. & 
Roelofs, J. (1992) Critical loads for nitrogen eutrophication of 
terrestrial and wetland ecosystems based upon changes in vegetation and fauna. In: Critical Loads for Nitrogen (P. Grennfelt
& E. Thornelof, eds), pp. 111–160. Nordic Council of Ministers,
Copenhagen.
Boden, T.A., Kanciruk, P. & Fartell, M.P. (1990) Trends ’90. A
Compendium of Data on Global Change . Carbon Dioxide Analysis
Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN.
Boersma, P.D., Kareiva, P., Fagan, W.F., Clark, J.A. & Hoekstra, J.M.
(2001) How good are endangered species recovery plans?
BioScience , 51, 643–650.
Boivin, G., Fauvergue, X. & Wajnberg, E. (2004) Optimal patch 
residence time in egg parasitoids: innate versus learned estimateof patch quality. Oecologia , 138, 640–647.
Bojorquez-Tapia, L.A., Brower, L.P., Castilleja, G. et al. (2003)
Mapping expert knowledge: redesigning the monarch butterﬂy biosphere reserve. Conservation Biology , 17, 367–379.
Bolker, B.M., Pacala, S.W. & Neuhauser, C. (2003) Spatial dynamics
in model plant communities: what do we really know. American
Naturalist , 162, 135–148.
Bonnet, X., Lourdais, O., Shine, R. & Naulleau, G. (2002) Reproduc-
tion in a typical capital breeder: costs, currencies and complicationsin the aspic viper. Ecology , 83, 2124–2135.
Bonsall, M.B. & Hassell, M.P. (1997) Apparent competition structures
ecological assemblages. Nature , 388, 371–372.
Bonsall, M.B., French, D.R. & Hassell, M.P. (2002) Metapopulation
structure affects persistence of predator–prey interactions. Journal
of Animal Ecology , 71, 1075–1084.
Booth, B.D. & Swanton, C.J. (2002) Assembly theory applied to weed
communities. Weed Science , 50, 2–13.
Booth, D.J. & Brosnan, D.M. (1995) The role of recruitment dynamics
in rocky shore and coral reef ﬁsh communities. Advances in
Ecological Research , 26, 309–385.
Booth, D.T., Clayton, D.H. & Block, B.A. (1993) Experimental
demonsration of the energetic cost of parasitism in free-ranging
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 662REFERENCES 663
hosts. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 253,
125–129.
Boots, M. & Begon, M. (1993) Trade-offs with resistance to a 
granulosis virus in the Indian meal moth, examined by a labor-
atory evolution experiment. Functional Ecology , 7, 528–534.
Bormann, B.T. & Gordon, J.C. (1984) Stand density effects in young
red alder plantations: productivity, photosynthate partitioningand nitrogen ﬁxation. Ecology , 65, 394–402.
Bossenbroek, J.M., Kraft, C.E. & Nekola, J.C. (2001) Prediction of 
long-distance dispersal using gravity models: zebra mussel invasion
in inland lakes. Ecological Applications , 11, 1778–1788.
Boyce, M.S. (1984) Restitution of r- and K-selection as a model of 
density-dependent natural selection. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics , 15, 427–447.
Boyd, P.W. (2002) The role of iron in the biogeochemistry of the
Southern Ocean and equatorial Paciﬁc: a comparison of in situ iron
enrichments. Deep-Sea Research II , 49, 1803–1821.
Bradshaw, A.D. (1987) The reclamation of derelict land and the 
ecology of ecosystems. In: Restoration Ecology (W.R. Jordan III, 
M.E. Gilpin & J.D. Aber, eds), pp. 53–74. Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge, UK.
Bradshaw, A.D. (2002) Introduction – an ecological perspective. In:
The Restoration and Management of Derelict Land: modern approaches(M.H. Wong & A.D. Bradshaw, eds), pp. 1–6. World ScientiﬁcPublishing, Singapore.
Branch, G.M. (1975) Intraspeciﬁc competition in Patella cochlear Born.
Journal of Animal Ecology , 44, 263–281.
Brewer, M.J. & Elliott, N.C. (2004) Biological control of cereal
aphids in North America and mediating effects of host plant andhabitat manipulations. Annual Review of Entomology , 49, 219–242.
Breznak, J.A. (1975) Symbiotic relationships between termites and 
their intestinal biota. In: Symbiosis (D.H. Jennings & D.L. Lee, eds),
pp. 559–580. Symposium 29, Society for Experimental Biology,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Briand, F. (1983) Environmental control of food web structure.
Ecology , 64, 253–263.
Briand, F. & Cohen, J.E. (1987) Environmental correlates of food chain
length. Science , 238, 956–960.
Brittain, J.E. & Eikeland, T.I. (1988) Invertebrate drift – a review.
Hydrobiologia , 166, 77–93.
Brokaw, N. & Busing, R.T. (2000) Niche versus chance and tree 
diversity in forest gaps. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 15,
183–188.
Bronstein, J.L. (1988) Mutualism, antagonism and the ﬁg–pollinator
interaction. Ecology , 69, 1298–1302.
Brook, B.W., O’Grady, J.J., Chapman, A.P., Burgman, M.A.,
Akcakaya, H.R. & Frankham, R. (2000) Predictive accuracy of population viability analysis in conservation biology. Nature , 404,
385–387.
Brookes, M. (1998) The species enigma. New Scientist , June 13, 1998.
Brooks, R.R. (ed.) (1998) Plants that Hyperaccumulate Heavy Metals . CAB
International, Wallingford, UK.
Brower, J.E., Zar, J.H. & van Ender, C.N. (1998) Field and Laboratory
Methods for General Ecology , 4th edn. McGraw-Hill, Boston.Brower, L.P. & Corvinó, J.M. (1967) Plant poisons in a terrestrial food
chain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the USA , 57,
893–898.
Brown, B.E. (1997) Coral bleaching: causes and consequences. Coral
Reefs , 16, S129 –S138.
Brown, E., Dunne, R.P., Goodson, M.S. & Douglas, A.E. (2000)
Bleaching patterns in reef corals. 
Nature , 404, 142–143.
Brown, H.T. & Escombe, F. (1990) Static diffusion of gases and 
liquids in relation to the assimilation of carbon and translocation
in plants. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London,
Series B , 193, 223–291.
Brown, J.H. & Davidson, D.W. (1977) Competition between seed-
eating rodents and ants in desert ecosystems. Science , 196,
880–882.
Brown, J.H. & Kodric-Brown, A. (1977) Turnover rates in insular 
biogeography: effect of immigration and extinction. Ecology , 58,
445–449.
Brown, J.H. & Maurer, B.A. (1989) Macroecology: the division of food
and space among species on continents. Science , 243, 1145–1150.
Brown, J.S., Kotler, B.P., Smith, R.J. & Wirtz, W.O. III (1988) The
effects of owl predation on the foraging behaviour of heteromyid
rodents. Oecologia , 76, 408–415.
Brown, K.M. (1982) Resource overlap and competition in pond
snails: an experimental analysis. Ecology , 63, 412–422.
Brown, V.K. & Southwood, T.R.E. (1983) Trophic diversity, niche
breadth, and generation times of exopterygote insects in a sec-ondary succession. Oecologia , 56, 220–225.
Browne, R.A. (1981) Lakes as islands: biogeographic distribution,
turnover rates, and species composition in the lakes of central NewYork. Journal of Biogeography , 8, 75–83.
Brunet, A.K. & Medellín, R.A. (2001) The species–area relationship
in bat assemblages of tropical caves. Journal of Mammalogy , 82,
1114–1122.
Brylinski, M. & Mann, K.H. (1973) An analysis of factors governing
productivity in lakes and reservoirs. Limnology and Oceanography ,
18, 1–14.
Bshary, R. (2003) The cleaner wrasse, Labroides dimidiatus , is a key
organism for reef ﬁsh diversity at Ras Mohammed National Park,Egypt. Journal of Animal Ecology , 72, 169–176.
Bubier, J.L. & Moore, T.R. (1994) An ecological perspective on
methane emissions from northern wetlands. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 9, 460–464.
Buchanan, G.A., Crowley, R.H., Street, J.E. & McGuire, J.A. (1980)
Competition of sicklepod ( Cassia obtusifolia ) and redroot pigweed
(Amaranthus retroﬂexus ) with cotton ( Gossypium hirsutum ). Weed
Science , 28, 258–262.
Buckling, A. & Rainey, P.B. (2002) Antagonistic coevolution
between a bacterium and a bacteriophage. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Series B , 269, 931–936.
Buesseler, K.O. (1998) The decoupling of production and particulate
export in the surface ocean. Global Biogeochemical Cycles , 12,
297–310.
Bull, C.M. & Burzacott, D. (1993) The impact of tick load on the ﬁtness
of their lizard hosts. Oecologia , 96, 415–419.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 663664 REFERENCES
Bullock, J.M., Franklin, J., Stevenson, M.J. et al. (2001) A plant trait
analysis of responses to grazing in a long-term experiment.
Journal of Applied Ecology , 38, 253–267.
Bullock, J.M., Mortimer, A.M. & Begon, M. (1994a) Physiological 
integration among tillers of Holcus lanatus : age-dependence and
responses to clipping and competition. New Phytologist , 128,
737–747.
Bullock, J.M., Mortimer, A.M. & Begon, M. (1994b) The effect of 
clipping on interclonal competition in the grass Holcus lanatus –
a response surface analysis. Journal of Ecology , 82, 259–270.
Bullock, J.M., Moy, I.L., Pywell, R.F., Coulson, S.J., Nolan, A.M. &
Caswell, H. (2002) Plant dispersal and colonization processes 
at local and landscape scales. In: Dispersal Ecology ( J.M. Bullock,
R.E. Kenward & R.S. Hails, eds), pp. 279–302. Blackwell Science,Oxford.
Burdon, J.J. (1987) Diseases and Plant Population Biology . Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Buscot, F., Munch, J.C., Charcosset, J.Y., Gardes, M., Nehls, U. 
& Hampp, R. (2000) Recent advances in exploring physiology and biodiversity of ectomycorrhizas highlight the functioning ofthese symbioses in ecosystems. FEMS Microbiology Reviews , 24,
601–614.
Busing, R.T. & Brokaw, N. (2002) Tree species diversity in temper-
ate and tropical forest gaps: the role of lottery recruitment. Folia
Geobotanica , 37, 33–43.
Buss, L.W. (1979) Byrozoan overgrowth interactions – the interdepend-
ence of competition for food and space. Nature , 281, 475–477.
Cadenasso, M.L., Pickett, S.T.A. & Morin, P.J. (2002) Experimental
test of the role of mammalian herbivores on old ﬁeld succession:community structure and seedling survival. Journal of the Torrey
Botanical Society , 129, 228–237.
Cain, M.L., Pacala, S.W., Silander, J.A. & Fortin, M.-J. (1995) Neigh-
bourhood models of clonal growth in the white clover Trifolium
repens. American Naturalist , 145, 888–917.
Caldwell, M.M. & Richards, J.H. (1986) Competing root systems: 
morphology and models of absorption. In: On the Economy of Plant
Form and Function (T.J. Givnish, ed.), pp. 251–273. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Callaghan, T.V. (1976) Strategies of growth and population dynamics
of plants: 3. Growth and population dynamics of Carex bigelowii
in an alpine environment. Oikos , 27, 402–413.
Callaway, R.M., Kikvidze, Z. & Kikodze, D. (2000) Facilitation by
unpalatable weeds may conserve plant diversity in overgrazedmeadows in the Caucasus mountains. Oikos , 89, 275–282.
Cammell, M.E., Tatchell, G.M. & Woiwod, I.P. (1989) Spatial 
pattern of abundance of the black bean aphid, Aphis fabae , in 
Britain. Journal of Applied Ecology , 26, 463–472.
Campbell, J., Antoine, D., Armstrong, R. et al. (2002) Comparison of
algorithms for estimating ocean primary productivity from surfacechlorophyll, temperature, and irradiance. Global Biogeochemical
Cycles , 16, 91–96.
Caraco, N.F. (1993) Disturbance of the phosphorus cycle: a case of
indirect effects of human activity. Trends in Ecology and Evolution ,
8, 51–54.Caraco, T. & Kelly, C.K. (1991) On the adaptive value of physio-
logical integration of clonal plants. Ecology , 72, 81–93.
Cardillo, M. & Bromham, L. (2001) Body size and risk of extinction
in Australian mammals. Conservation Biology , 15, 1435–1440.
Carignan, R., Planas, D. & Vis, C. (2000) Planktonic production and
respiration in oligotrophic Shield lakes. Limnology and Oceanography ,
45, 189–199.
Carne, P.B. (1969) On the population dynamics of the eucalypt-
defoliating chrysomelid Paropsis atomaria OI. Australian Journal 
of Zoology , 14, 647–672.
Carpenter, S.R., Ludwig, D. & Brock, W.A. (1999) Management of
eutrophication for lakes subject to potentially irreversible change.
Ecological Applications , 9, 751–771.
Carr, M.H., Neigel, J.E., Estes, J.A., Andelman, S., Warner, R.R. &
Largier, J.L. (2003) Comparing marine and terrestrial ecosystems:
implications for the design of coastal marine reserves. Ecological
Applications , 13 (Suppl.), S90–S107.
Carson, H.L. & Kaneshiro, K.Y. (1976) Drosophila of Hawaii: systematics
and ecological genetics. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics ,
7, 311–345.
Carson, W.P. & Root, R.B. (1999) Top-down effects of insect herbivores
during early succession: inﬂuence on biomass and plant dominance.Oecologia , 121, 260–272.
Cary, J.R. & Keith, L.B. (1979) Reproductive change in the 10-year
cycle of snowshoe hares. Canadian Journal of Zoology , 57, 375–390.
Caswell, H. (2001) Matrix Population Models , 2nd edn. Sinauer,
Sunderland, MA.
Caughley, G. (1994) Directions in conservation biology. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 63, 215–244.
Cebrian, J. (1999) Patterns in the fate of production in plant com-
munities. American Naturalist , 154, 449–468.
Charlesworth, D. & Charlesworth, B. (1987) Inbreeding depression
and its evolutionary consequences. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics , 18, 237–268.
Charnov, E.L. (1976a) Optimal foraging: attack strategy of a mantid.
American Naturalist , 110, 141–151.
Charnov, E.L. (1976b) Optimal foraging: the marginal value theorem.
Theoretical Population Biology , 9, 129–136.
Charnov, E.L. & Krebs, J.R. (1974) On clutch size and ﬁtness. Ibis,
116, 217–219.
Chase, J.M. (2000) Are there real differences among aquatic and 
terrestrial food webs? Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 15, 408–412.
Chase, J.M. (2003) Experimental evidence for alternative stable 
equilibria in a benthic pond food web. Ecology Letters , 6, 733–741.
Cherrett, J.M., Powell, R.J. & Stradling, D.J. (1989) The mutualism
between leaf-cutting ants and their fungus. In: Insect/Fungus Inter-
actions (N. Wilding, N.M. Collins, P.M. Hammond & J.F. Webber,
eds), pp. 93–120. Royal Entomological Society Symposium No. 14.Academic Press, London.
Chesson, P. & Murdoch, W.W. (1986) Aggregation of risk: relation-
ships among host–parasitoid models. American Naturalist , 127,
696–715.
Childs, D.Z., Rees, M., Rose, K.E., Grubb, P.J. & Elner, S.P. (2003)
Evolution of complex ﬂowering strategies: an age- and size-
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 664REFERENCES 665
structured integral projection model. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London, Series B , 270, 1829–1838.
Choquenot, D. (1998) Testing the relative inﬂuence of intrinsic and
extrinsic variation in food availability on feral pig populations in
Australia’s rangelands . Journal of Animal Ecology , 67, 887–907.
Choudhary, M., Strassman, J.E., Queller, D.C., Turilazzi, S. &
Cervo, R. (1994) Social parasites in polistine wasps are monophyletic:implications for sympatric speciation. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Series B , 257, 31–35.
Christian, J.J. (1980) Endocrine factors in population regulation. 
In: Biosocial Mechanisms of Population Regulation (M.N. Cohen,
R.S. Malpass & H.G. Klein, eds), pp. 55–115. Yale University Press,
New Haven, CT.
Clapham, W.B. (1973) Natural Ecosystems . Collier–Macmillan, New York.
Clark, C.W. (1981) Bioeconomics. In: Theoretical Ecology: principles 
and applications , 2nd edn. (R.M. May, ed.), pp. 387–418. Blackwell
Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Clark, C.W. & Mangel, M. (2000) Dynamic State Variable Models in
Ecology . Oxford University Press, New York.
Clark, D.A. & Clark, D.B. (1984) Spacing dynamics of a tropical rain
forest tree: evaluation of the Janzen–Connell model. American
Naturalist , 124, 769–788.
Clark, J.A. & Harvey, E. (2002) Assessing multi-species recovery
plans under the endangered species act. Ecological Applications , 12,
655–662.
Clark, L.R. (1962) The general biology of Cardiaspina albitextura
(Psyllidae) and its abundance in relation to weather and parasitism.Australian Journal of Zoology , 10, 537–586.
Clark, L.R. (1964) The population dynamics of Cardiaspina albitextura
(Psyllidae). Australian Journal of Zoology , 12, 362–380.
Clarke, A. (2004) Is there a universal temperature dependence of
metabolism? Functional Ecology , 18, 252–256.
Clarke, A. & Crame, J.A. (2003) The importance of historical processes
in global patterns of diversity. In: Macroecology: concepts and con-
sequences (T.M. Blackburn & K.J. Gaston, eds), pp. 130–151.
Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Clarke, B.C. & Partridge, L. (eds) (1988) Frequency dependent 
selection. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London,
Series B , 319, 457–645.
Clay, K. (1990) Fungal endophytes of grasses. Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics , 21, 275–297.
Clearwater, J.R. (2001) Tackling tussock moths: strategies, timelines
and outcomes of two programs for eradicating tussock moths fromAuckland suburbs. In: Eradication of Island Invasives: practical actions
and results achieved (M. Clout & D. Veitch, eds). Conference of
the Invasive Species Specialist Group of the World ConservationUnion (IUCN) Species Survival Commission. UICN, Auckland, New Zealand.
Clements, F.E. (1916) Plant Succession: analysis of the development of 
vegetation . Carnegie Institute of Washington Publication No. 242.
Washington, DC.
Clinchy, M., Haydon, D.T. & Smith, A.T. (2002) Pattern does not
equal process: what does patch occupancy really tell us aboutmetapopulation dynamics? American Naturalist , 159, 351–362.Clobert, J., Wolff, J.O., Nichols, J.D., Danchin, E. & Dhondt, A.A.
(2001) Introduction. In: Dispersal ( J. Clobert, E. Danchin, A.A.
Dhondt & J.D. Nichols, eds), pp. xvii–xxi. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Clutton-Brock, T.H. & Harvey, P.H. (1979) Comparison and adapta-
tion. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 205, 547–565.
Clutton-Brock, T.H., Major, M., Albon, S.D. & Guinness, F.E. (1987)
Early development and population dynamics in red deer. I.
Density-dependent effects on juvenile survival. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 56, 53–67.
Clutton-Brock, T.H., Major, M. & Guinness, F.E. (1985) Population
regulation in male and female red deer. Journal of Animal Ecology ,
54, 831–836.
Coale, K.H., Johnson, K.S., Fitzwater, S.E. et al. (1996) A massive 
phytoplankton bloom induced by an ecosystem-scale iron fertil-
ization experiment in the Equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean. Nature , 383,
495–501.
Cockell, C.S. & Lee, P. (2002) The biology of impact craters – a review.
Biological Reviews , 77, 279–310.
Cody, M.L. (1975) Towards a theory of continental species divers-
ities. In: Ecology and Evolution of Communities (M.L. Cody & 
J.M. Diamond, eds), pp. 214–257. Belknap, Cambridge, MA.
Cohen, J.E., Jonsson, T. & Carpenter, S.R. (2003) Ecological community
description using food web, species abundance, and body-size.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the USA , 100,
1781–1786.
Cole, J.J., Findlay, S. & Pace, M.L. (1988) Bacterial production in 
fresh and salt water ecosystems: a cross-system overview. Marine
Ecology Progress Series , 4, 1–10.
Collado-Vides, L. (2001) Clonal architecture in marine macroalgae:
ecological and evolutionary perspectives. Evolutionary Ecology , 
15, 531–545.
Collins, M.D., Ward, S.A. & Dixon, A.F.G. (1981) Handling time 
and the functional response of Aphelinus thomsoni , a predator and
parasite of the aphid, Drepanosiphum platanoidis. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 50, 479–487.
Colwell, R.K. & Hurtt, G.C. (1994) Non-biological gradients in species
richness and a spurious Rapoport effect. American Naturalist , 144,
570–595.
Comins, H.N., Hassell, M.P. & May, R.M. (1992) The spatial dynam-
ics of host–parasitoid systems. Journal of Animal Ecology , 61,
735–748.
Compton, S.G. (2001) sailing with the wind: dispersal by small 
ﬂying insects. In: Dispersal Ecology ( J.M. Bullock, R.E. Kenward
& R.S. Hails, eds), pp. 113–133. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Connell, J.H. (1961) The inﬂuence of interspeciﬁc competition and other
factors on the distribution of the barnacle Chthamalus stellatus.
Ecology , 42, 710–723.
Connell, J.H. (1970) A predator–prey system in the marine intertidal
region. I. Balanus glandula and several predatory species of Thais.
Ecological Monographs , 40, 49–78.
Connell, J.H. (1971) On the role of natural enemies in preventing 
competitive exclusion in some marine animals and in rain foresttrees. In: Dynamics of Populations (P.J. den Boer & G.R. Gradwell,
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 665666 REFERENCES
eds), pp. 298–310. Proceedings of the Advanced Study Institute
in Dynamics of Numbers in Populations, Oosterbeck. Centre forAgricultural Publishing and Documentation, Wageningen.
Connell, J.H. (1975) Some mechanisms producing structure in natural
communities: a model and evidence from ﬁeld experiments. In:
Ecology and Evolution of Communities (M.L. Cody & J.M. Diamond,
eds), pp. 460–490. Belknap, Cambridge, MA.
Connell, J.H. (1978) Diversity in tropical rainforests and coral reefs.
Science , 199, 1302–1310.
Connell, J.H. (1979) Tropical rain forests and coral reefs as open
nonequilibrium systems. In: Population Dynamics (R.M. Anderson,
B.D. Turner & L.R. Taylor, eds), pp. 141–163. Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, Oxford.
Connell, J.H. (1980) Diversity and the coevolution of competitors,
or the ghost of competition past. Oikos , 35, 131–138.
Connell, J.H. (1983) On the prevalence and relative importance of
interspeciﬁc competition: evidence from ﬁeld experiments. American
Naturalist , 122, 661–696.
Connell, J.H. (1990) Apparent versus ‘real’ competition in plants. 
In: Perspectives on Plant Competition ( J.B. Grace & D. Tilman, eds),
pp. 9–26. Academic Press, New York.
Connor, E.F. (1986) The role of Pleistocene forest refugia in the 
evolution and biogeography of tropical biotas. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution , 1, 165–169.
Cook, L.M., Dennis, R.L.H. & Mani, G.S. (1999) Melanic morph fre-
quency in the peppered moth in the Manchester area. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 266, 293–297.
Cook, R.M., Sinclair, A. & Stefansson, G. (1997) Potential collapse
of North Sea cod stocks. Nature , 385, 521–522.
Coomes, D.A., Rees, M., Turnbull, L. & Ratcliffe, S. (2002) On the
mechanisms of coexistence among annual-plant species, using neigh-bourhood techniques and simulation models. Plant Ecology , 163,
23–38.
Corn, P.S. (2003) Amphibian breeding and climate change: importance
of snow in the mountains. Conservation Biology , 17, 622–625.
Cornell, H.V. & Hawkins, B.A. (2003) Herbivore responses to plant
secondary compounds: a test of phytochemical coevolution theory.American Naturalist , 161, 507–522.
Cornwell, W.K. & Grubb, P.J. (2003) Regional and local patterns in
plant species richness with respect to resource availability. Oikos ,
100, 417–428.
Cortes, E. (2002) Incorporating uncertainty into demographic 
modeling: application to shark populations and their conservation.Conservation Biology , 16, 1048–1062.
Cory, J.S. & Myers, J.H. (2000) Direct and indirect ecological effects
of biological control. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 15, 137–139.
Costantino, R.F., Desharnais, R.A., Cushing, J.M. & Dennis, B.
(1997) Chaotic dynamics in an insect population. Science , 275,
389–391.
Costanza, R., D’Arge, R., de Groot, R. et al. (1997) The value of the
world’s ecosystem services and natural capital. Nature 387, 253–260.
Cotrufo, M.F., Ineson, P., Scott, A. et al. (1998) Elevated CO
2reduces
the nitrogen concentration of plant tissues. Global Change Biology ,
4, 43–54.Cottingham, K.L., Brown, B.L. & Lennon, J.T. (2001) Biodiversity may
regulate the temporal variability of ecological systems. Ecology Letters ,
4, 72–85.
Courchamp, F., Clutton-Brock, T. & Grenfell, B. (1999) Inverse density
dependence and the Allee effect. Trends in Ecology and Evolution ,
14, 405–410.
Courchamp, F., Langlais, M. & Sugihara, G. (1999) Cats protecting
birds: modeling the mesopredator release effect. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 68, 282–292.
Cowie, R.J. (1977) Optimal foraging in great tits Parus major. Nature ,
268, 137–139.
Cox, C.B., Healey, I.N. & Moore, P.D. (1976) Biogeography , 2nd edn.
Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Crawford, D.W., Purdie, D.A., Lockwood, A.P.M. & Weissman, P.
(1997) Recurrent red-tides in the Southampton Water estuary causedby the phototrophic ciliate Mesodinium rubrum . Estuarine, Coastal
and Shelf Science , 45, 799–812.
Crawley, M.J. (1983) Herbivory: the dynamics of animal–plant interactions .
Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Crawley, M.J. (1986) The structure of plant communities. In: Plant
Ecology (M.J. Crawley, ed.), pp. 1–50. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publica-
tions, Oxford.
Crawley, M.J. (1989) Insect herbivores and plant population dynamics.
Annual Review of Entomology , 34, 531–564.
Crawley, M.J. & May, R.M. (1987) Population dynamics and plant
community structure: competition between annuals and perennials.Journal of Theoretical Biology , 125, 475–489.
Crocker, R.L. & Major, J. (1955) Soil development in relation to 
vegetation and surface age at Glacier Bay, Alaska. Journal of Ecology ,
43, 427–448.
Cronk, Q.C.B. & Fuller, J.L. (1995) Plant Invaders . Chapman & Hall,
London.
Culver, C.S. & Kuris, A.M. (2000) The apparent eradication of a locally
established introduced marine pest. Biological Invasions , 2, 245–253.
Cummins, K.W. (1974) Structure and function of stream ecosystems.
Bioscience , 24, 631–641.
Currie, C.R. (2001) A community of ants, fungi, and bacteria: a 
multilateral approach to studying symbiosis. Annual Review of
Microbiology , 55, 357–380.
Currie, D.J. (1991) Energy and large-scale patterns of animal and plant
species richness. American Naturalist , 137, 27–49.
Currie, D.J. & Paquin, V. (1987) Large-scale biogeographical patterns
of species richness in trees. Nature , 39, 326–327.
Daan, S., Dijkstra, C. & Tinbergen, J.M. (1990) Family planning in
the kestrel ( Falco tinnunculus ): the ultimate control of covariation
of laying date and clutch size. Behavior , 114, 83–116.
Dahl, E. (1979) Deep-sea carrion feeding amphipods: evolutionary 
patterns in niche adaptation. Oikos , 33, 167–175.
Daily, G.C., Soderqvist, T., Aniyar, S. et al. (2000) The value of nature
and the nature of value. Science , 289, 395–396.
Darwin, C. (1859) The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection ,
1st edn. John Murray, London.
Darwin, C. (1888) 
The Formation of Vegetable Mould Through the Action
of Worms . John Murray, London.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 666REFERENCES 667
Daufresne, T. & Loreau, M. (2001) Ecological stoichiometry, primary
producer–decomposer interactions, and ecosystem persistence.
Ecology , 82, 3069–3082.
Davidson, D.W. (1977) Species diversity and community organiza-
tion in desert seed-eating ants. Ecology , 58, 711–724.
Davidson, D.W., Samson, D.A. & Inouye, R.S. (1985) Granivory in
the Chihuahuan Desert: interactions within and between trophic
levels. Ecology , 66, 486–502.
Davidson, J. & Andrewartha, H.G. (1948) The inﬂuence of rainfall,
evaporation and atmospheric temperature on ﬂuctuations in the
size of a natural population of Thrips imaginis (Thysanoptera). Journal
of Animal Ecology , 17, 200–222.
Davies, J.B. (1994) Sixty years of onchocerciasis vector control – a
chronological summary with comments on eradication, reinva-sion, and insecticide resistance. Annual Review of Entomology , 39,
23–45.
Davies, K.F., Margules, C.R. & Lawrence, J.F. (2000) Which traits of
species predict population declines in experimental forest fragments.Ecology , 81, 1450–1461.
Davies, N.B. (1977) Prey selection and social behaviour in wagtails
(Aves: Motacillidae). Journal of Animal Ecology , 46, 37–57.
Davies, N.B. & Houston, A.I. (1984) Territory economics. In: Beha-
vioural Ecology: an evolutionary approach , 2nd edn ( J.R. Krebs & 
N.B. Davies, eds), pp. 148–169. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications,Oxford.
Davies, S.J., Palmiotto, P.A., Ashton, P.S., Lee, H.S. & Lafrankie, J.V.
(1998) Comparative ecology of 11 sympatric species of Macaranga
in Borneo: tree distribution in relation to horizontal and verticalresource heterogeneity. Journal of Ecology , 86, 662–673.
Davis, A.L.V. (1996) Seasonal dung beetle activity and dung dis-
persal in selected South African habitats: implications for pastureimprovement in Australia. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment ,
58, 157–169.
Davis, M.B. (1976) Pleistocene biogeography of temperate deciduous
forests. Geoscience and Man , 13, 13–26.
Davis, M.B. & Shaw, R.G. (2001) Range shifts and adaptive responses
to quarternary climate change. Science , 292, 673–679.
Davis, M.B., Brubaker, L.B. & Webb, T. III (1973) Calibration of 
absolute pollen inﬂex. In: Quaternary Plant Ecology (H.J.B. Birks &
R.G. West, eds), pp. 9–25. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications,Oxford.
Dayan, T., Simberloff, E., Tchernov, E. & Yom-Tov, Y. (1989) Inter-
and intraspeciﬁc character displacement in mustelids. Ecology , 70,
1526–1539.
De Groot, K.L. & Smith, J.N.M. (2001) Community-wide impacts of
a generalist brood parasite, the brown-headed cowbird ( Molothrus
ater). Ecology , 82, 868–881.
de Jong, G. (1994) The ﬁtness of ﬁtness concepts and the description
of natural selection. Quarterly Review of Biology , 69, 3–29.
De Kroon, H., Plaisier, A., Van Groenendael, J. & Caswell, H. (1986)
Elasticity: the relative contribution of demographic parameters to
population growth rate. Ecology , 67, 1427–1431.
de Wet, N., Ye, W., Hales, S., Warrick, R., Woodward, A. &
Weinstein, P. (2001) Use of a computer model to identify potentialhotspots for dengue fever in New Zealand. New Zealand Medical
Journal , 114, 420–422.
de Wit, C.T. (1960) On competition. Verslagen van landbouwkundige
Onderzoekingen , 660, 1–82.
de Wit, C.T. (1965) Photosynthesis of leaf canopies. Verslagen van
Landbouwkundige Onderzoekingen , 663, 1–57.
de Wit, C.T., Tow, P.G. & Ennik, G.C. (1966) Competition between
legumes and grasses. Verslagen van landbouwkundige Onderzoekingen ,
112, 1017–1045.
Dean, A.M. (1983) A simple model of mutualism. American Naturalist ,
121, 409–417.
DeAngelis, D.L. (1975) Stability and connectance in food web 
models. Ecology , 56, 238–243.
DeAngelis, D.L. (1980) Energy ﬂow, nutrient cycling and ecosystem
resilience. Ecology , 61, 764–771.
DeAngelis, D.L. & Waterhouse, J.C. (1987) Equilibrium and non-
equilibrium concepts in ecological models. Ecological Monographs ,
57, 1–21.
Deevey, E.S. (1947) Life tables for natural populations of animals.
Quarterly Review of Biology , 22, 283–314.
DeLucia, E.H., Hamilton, J.G., Naidu, S.L. et al. (1999) Net primary
production of a forest ecosystem under experimental CO2enrich-
ment. Science , 284, 1177–1179.
Delworth, T.L. Stouffer, R.J., Dixon, K.W. et al. (2002) Review of 
simulations of climate variability and change with the GFDL R30
coupled climate model. Climate Dynamics , 19, 555–574.
Denno, R.F., McClure, M.S. & Ott, J.R. (1995) Interspeciﬁc inter-
actions in phytophagous insects: competition reexamined andresurrected. Annual Review of Entomology , 40, 297–331.
des Clers, S. (1998) Sustainability of the Falkland Islands Loligo 
squid ﬁshery. In: Conservation of Biological Resources (E.J. Milner-
Gulland & R. Mace, eds), pp. 225–241. Blackwell Science,
Oxford.
Deshmukh, I. (1986) Ecology and Tropical Biology . Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, Oxford.
DeVault, T.L. & Rhodes, O.E. (2002) Identiﬁcation of vertebrate 
scavengers of small mammal carcasses in a forested landscape. Acta Theriologica , 47, 185–192.
Dezfuli, B.S., Volponi, S., Beltrami, I. & Poulin, R. (2002) Intra- and
interspeciﬁc density-dependent effects on growth in helminthparasites of the cormorant Phalacrocorax carbo sinensis . Parasitology ,
124, 537–544.
Diamond, J.M. (1972) Biogeographic kinetics: estimation of relaxation
times for avifaunas of South-West Paciﬁc islands. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science of the USA , 69, 3199–3203.
Diamond, J.M. (1975) Assembly of species communities. In: Ecology
and Evolution of Communities (M.L. Cody & J.M. Diamond, eds),
pp. 342–444. Belknap, Cambridge, MA.
Diamond, J.M. (1983) Taxonomy by nucleotides. Nature , 305, 17–18.
Diamond, J.M. (1984) ‘Normal’ extinctions of isolated populations.
In: Extinctions (M.H. Nitecki, ed.), pp. 191–245. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Diamond, J. & Case, T.J. (eds) (1986) Community Ecology . Harper &
Row, New York.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 667668 REFERENCES
Dickie, I.A., Xu, B. & Koide, R.T. (2002) Vertical niche differentiation
of ectomycorrhizal hyphae in soil as shown by T-RFLP analysis.
New Phytologist , 156, 527–535.
Dieckmann, U., Law, R. & Metz, J.A.J. (2000) The Geometry of
Ecological Interactions: simplifying spatial complexity . Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Dixon, A.F.G. (1998) Aphid Ecology . Chapman & Hall, London.
Dobson, A.P. & Hudson, P.J. (1992) Regulation and stability of a free-
living host–parasite system: Trichostrongylus tenuis in red grouse.
II. Population models. Journal of Animal Ecology , 61, 487–498.
Dobson, A.P., Rodriguez, J.P. & Roberts, W.M. (2001) Synoptic 
tinkering: integrating strategies for large-scale conservation.
Ecological Applications , 11, 1019–1026.
Dodson, S.I., Arnott, S.E. & Cottingham, K.L. (2000) The relationship
in lake communities between primary productivity and species richness. Ecology , 81, 2662–2679.
Doube, B.M. (1987) Spatial and temporal organization in commun-
ities associated with dung pads and carcasses. In: Organization 
of Communities: past and present ( J.H.R. Gee & P.S. Giller, eds), 
pp. 255–280. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Doube, B.M., Macqueen, A., Ridsdill-Smith, T.J. & Weir, T.A. (1991)
Native and introduced dung beetles in Australia. In: Dung Beetle
Ecology (I. Hanski & Y. Cambefort, eds), pp. 255–278. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Douglas, A. & Smith, D.C. (1984) The green hydra symbiosis. VIII.
Mechanisms in symbiont regulation. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London, Series B , 221, 291–319.
Douglas, A.E. (1992) Microbial brokers of insect–plant interactions.
In: Proceedings of the 8th Symposium on Insect–Plant Relationships
(S.B.J. Menken, J.H. Visser & P. Harrewijn, eds), pp. 329–336.Kluwer Academic Publishing, Dordrecht.
Douglas, E. (1998) Nutritional interactions in insect–microbial 
symbioses: aphids and their symbiotic bacteria Buchnera . Annual
Review of Entomology , 43, 17–37.
Downing, A.L. & Leibold, M.A. (2002) Ecosystem consequences of
species richness and composition in pond food webs. Nature , 416,
837–840.
Drès, M. & Mallet, J. (2001) Host races in plant-feeding insects and
their importance in sympatric speciation. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 357, 471–492.
Duarte, C.M. (1992) Nutrient concentration of aquatic plants: patterns
across species. Limnology and Oceanography , 37, 882–889.
Ducrey, M. & Labbé, P. (1985) Étude de la régénération naturale 
contr dlée en f dret tropicale humide de Guadeloupe. I. Revue 
bibliographique, milieu naturel et élaboration d’un protocoleexpérimental. Annales Scientiﬁques Forestière , 42, 297–322.
Ducrey, M. & Labbé, P. (1986) Étude de la régénération naturale con-
trdlée en f dret tropicale humide de Guadeloupe. II. Installation
et croissance des semis après les coupes d’ensemencement. Annales
Scientiﬁques Forestière , 43, 299–326.
Duggan, I.C., Green, J.D. & Shiel, R.J. (2002) Distribution of rotifer
assemblages in North Island, New Zealand, lakes: relationshipstoenvironmental and historical factors. Freshwater Biology , 47,
195–206.Dulvy, N.K. & Reynolds, J.D. (2003) Predicting extinction vulner-
ability in skates. Conservation Biology , 16, 440–450.
Dunne, J.A., Williams, R.J. & Martinez, N.J. (2002) Network struc-
ture and biodiversity loss in food webs: robustness increases with
connectance. Ecology Letters , 5, 558–567.
Dwyer, G., Levin, S.A. & Buttel, L. (1990) A simulation model of the
population dynamics and evolution of myxomatosis. 
Ecological
Monographs , 60, 423–447.
Dytham, C. (1994) Habitat destruction and competitive coexistence:
a cellular model. Journal of Animal Ecology , 63, 490–491.
Eamus, D. (1999) Ecophysiological traits of deciduous and evergreen
woody species in the seasonally dry tropics. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 14, 11–16.
Ebert, D., Zschokke-Rohringer, C.D. & Carius, H.J. (2000) Dose effects
and density-dependent regulation in two microparasites of Daphnia
magna . Oecologia , 122, 200–209.
Edmonson, W.T. (1970) Phosphorus, nitrogen and algae in Lake
Washington after diversion of sewage. Science , 169, 690–691.
Edmonson, W.T. (1991) The Uses of Ecology: Lake Washington and beyond .
University of Washington Press, Seattle, WA.
Edwards, P.B. & Aschenborn, H.H. (1987) Patterns of nesting 
and dung burial in Onitis dung beetles: implications for pasture
productivity and ﬂy control. Journal of Applied Ecology , 24,
837–851.
Ehleringer, J.R. & Monson, R.K. (1993) Evolutionary and ecological
aspects of photosynthetic pathway variation. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics , 24, 411–439.
Ehleringer, J.R., Sage, R.F., Flanagan, L.B. & Pearcy, R.W. (1991)
Climate change and the evolution of C4photosynthesis. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution , 6, 95–99.
Ehrlich, P. & Raven, P.H. (1964) Butterﬂies and plants: a study in
coevolution. Evolution , 18, 586–608.
Eis, S., Garman, E.H. & Ebel, L.F. (1965) Relation between cone 
production and diameter increment of douglas ﬁr ( Pseudotsuga 
menziesii (Mirb). Franco), grand ﬁr ( Abies grandis Dougl.) and
western white pine ( Pinus monticola Dougl.). Canadian Journal of
Botany , 43, 1553–1559.
Elliott, J.K. & Mariscal, R.N. (2001) Coexistence of nine anenome-
ﬁsh species: differential host and habitat utilization, size and
recruitment. Marine Biology , 138, 23–36.
Elliott, J.M. (1984) Numerical changes and population regulation 
in young migratory trout Salmo trutta in a Lake District stream
1966–83. Journal of Animal Ecology , 53, 327–350.
Elliott, J.M. (1993) The self-thinning rule applied to juvenile sea-trout,
Salmo trutta. Journal of Animal Ecology , 62, 371–379.
Elliott, J.M. (1994) Quantitative Ecology and the Brown Trout . Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Ellison, A.M. & Gotelli, N.J. (2002) Nitrogen availability alters the
expression of carnivory in the northern pitcher plant, Sarracenia
purpurea . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA ,
99, 4409–4412.
Ellner, S.P., McCauley, E., Kendall, B.E. et al. (2001) Habitat struc-
ture and population persistence in an experimental community.Nature , 412, 538–543.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 668REFERENCES 669
Elmes, G.W., Akino, T., Thomas, J.A., Clarke, R.T. & Knapp, J.J. (2002)
Interspeciﬁc differences in cuticular hydrocarbon proﬁles of
Myrmica ants are sufﬁciently consistent to explain host speciﬁcity
by Maculinea (large blue) butterﬂies. Oecologia , 130, 525–535.
Elmhagen, B., Tannerfeldt, M., Verucci, P. & Angerbjorn, A. (2000)
The arctic fox ( Alopex lagopus ): an opportunistic specialist. Journal
of Zoology , 251, 139–149.
Elner, R.W. & Hughes, R.N. (1978) Energy maximisation in the diet
of the shore crab Carcinus maenas (L.). Journal of Animal Ecology ,
47, 103–116.
Elser, J.J. & Urabe, J. (1999) The stoichiometry of consumer-driven
nutrient recycling: theory, observations, and consequences.
Ecology , 80, 735–751.
Elton, C.S. (1924) Periodic ﬂuctuations in the number of animals: 
their causes and effects. British Journal of Experimental Biology , 2,
119–163.
Elton, C. (1927) Animal Ecology . Sidgwick & Jackson, London.
Elton, C. (1933) The Ecology of Animals . Methuen, London.
Elton, C.S. (1958) The Ecology of Invasions by Animals and Plants .
Methuen, London.
Elwood, J.W., Newbold, J.D., O’Neill, R.V. & van Winkle, W.
(1983) Resource spiralling: an operational paradigm for analyzinglotic ecosystems. In: Dynamics of Lotic Ecosystems (T.D. Fontaine
& S.M. Bartell, eds), pp. 3–28. Ann Arbor Science Publishers, Ann Arbor, MI.
Emiliani, C. (1966) Isotopic palaeotemperatures. Science , 154, 851–857.
Engelhardt, K.A.M. & Ritchie, M.E. (2002) The effect of aquatic 
plant species richness on wetland ecosystem processes. Ecology ,
83, 2911–2924.
Engen, S., Lande, R. & Saether, B.-E. (1997) Harvesting strategies for
ﬂuctuating populations based on uncertain population estimates.Journal of Theoretical Ecology , 186, 201–212.
Enquist, B.J., Brown, J.H. & West, G.B. (1998) Allometric scaling of
plant energetics and population density. Nature , 395, 163–165.
Enriquez, S., Duarte, C.M. & Sand-Jensen, K. (1993) Patterns in 
decomposition rates among photosynthetic organisms: the import-ance of detritus C:N:P  content. Oecologia , 94, 457–471.
Ens, B.J., Kersten, M., Brenninkmeijer, A. & Hulscher, J.B. (1992)
Territory quality, parental effort and reproductive success of oystercatchers ( Haematopus ostralegus ). Journal of Animal Ecology , 
61, 703–715.
Epstein, H.E., Lauenroth, W.K. & Burke, I.C. (1997) Effects of tem-
perature and soil texture on ANPP in US Great Plains. Ecology ,
78, 2628–2631.
Ergon, T., Lambin, X. & Stenseth, N.C. (2001) Life history traits 
of voles in a ﬂuctuating population respond to the immediate environment. Nature , 411, 1041–1043.
Ericsson, G., Wallin, K., Ball, J.P. & Broberg, M. (2001) Age-related
reproductive effort and senescence in free-ranging moose, Alces
alces. Ecology , 82, 1613–1620.
Erwin, T.L. (1982) Tropical forests: their richness in Coleoptera and
other arthropod species. Coleopterists Bulletin , 36, 74–75.
Ettema, C.H. & Wardle, D.A. (2002) Spatial soil ecology. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution , 17, 177–183.Facelli, J.M. & Pickett, S.T.A. (1990) Markovian chains and the role
of history in succession. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 5, 27–30.
Fahrig, L. & Merriam, G. (1994) Conservation of fragmented popula-
tions. Conservation Biology , 8, 50–59.
Fairweather, P.G. (1999) State of environment indicators of ‘river
health’: exploring the metaphor. Freshwater Biology , 41, 211–220.
Fajer, E.D. (1989) The effects of enriched CO2atmospheres on plant–
insect–herbivore interactions: growth responses of larvae of the
specialist butterﬂy, Junonia coenia (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae).
Oecologia , 81, 514–520.
Falge, E., Baldocchi, D., Tenhunen, J. et al. (2002) Seasonality of eco-
system respiration and gross primary production as derived from
FLUXNET measurements. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology ,
113, 53–74.
Fanshawe, S., Vanblaricom, G.R. & Shelly, A.A. (2003) Restored top
carnivores as detriments to the performance of marine protected
areas intended for ﬁshery sustainability: a case study. Conservation
Biology , 17, 273–283.
FAO (1995) World Fishery Production 1950–93 . Food and Agriculture
Organization, Rome.
FAO (1999) The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 1998 . Food and
Agriculture Organization, Rome.
Fasham, M.J.R., Balino, B.M. & Bowles, M.C. (2001) A new vision of
ocean biogeochemistry after a decade of the Joint Global OceanFlux Study ( JGOFS). Ambio Special Report , 10, 4–31.
Feeny, P. (1976) Plant apparency and chemical defence. Recent Advances
in Phytochemistry , 10, 1–40.
Fenchel, T. (1987a) Ecology – Potentials and Limitations . Ecology
Institute, Federal Republic of Germany.
Fenchel, T. (1987b) Patterns in microbial aquatic communities. 
In: Organization of Communities: past and present ( J.H.R. Gee & P.S.
Giller, eds), pp. 281–294. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications,Oxford.
Fenner, F. (1983) Biological control, as exempliﬁed by smallpox
eradication and myxomatosis. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, Series B , 218, 259–285.
Fenner, F. & Ratcliffe, R.N. (1965) Myxomatosis . Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, London.
Fenton, A., Fairbairn, J.P., Norman, R. & Hudson, P.J. (2002) Parasite
transmission: reconciling theory and reality. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 71, 893–905.
Field, C.B., Behrenﬁeld, M.J., Randerson, J.T. & Falkowski, P.G. (1998)
Primary production of the biosphere: integrating terrestrial andoceanic components. Science , 281, 237–240.
Fieldler, P.L. (1987) Life history and population dynamics of rare and
common Mariposa lilies ( Calochortus Pursh: Liliaceae). Journal of
Ecology , 75, 977–995.
Firbank, L.G. & Watkinson, A.R. (1985) On the analysis of competi-
tion within two-species mixtures of plants. Journal of Applied
Ecology , 22, 503–517.
Firbank, L.G. & Watkinson, A.R. (1990) On the effects of competition:
from monocultures to mixtures. In: Perspectives on Plant Com-
petition ( J.B. Grace & D. Tilman, eds), pp. 165–192. Academic Press,
New York.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 669670 REFERENCES
Fischer, M. & Matthies, D. (1998) Effects of population size on per-
formance in the rare plant Gentianella germanica . Journal of Ecology ,
86, 195–204.
Fisher, R.A. (1930) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection . Clarendon
Press, Oxford.
FitzGibbon, C.D. (1990) Anti-predator strategies of immature
Thomson’s gazelles: hiding and the prone response. Animal
Behaviour , 40, 846–855.
FitzGibbon, C.D. & Fanshawe, J. (1989) The condition and age of
Thomson’s gazelles killed by cheetahs and wild dogs. Journal of
Zoology , 218, 99–107.
Flashpohler, D.J., Bub, B.R. & Kaplin, B.A. (2000) Application of con-
servation biology research to management. Conservation Biology ,
14, 1898–1902.
Flecker, A.S. & Townsend, C.R. (1994) Community-wide con-
sequences of trout introduction in New Zealand streams.
Ecological Applications , 4, 798–807.
Flenley, J. (1993) The origins of diversity in tropical rain forests. Trends
in Ecology and Evolution , 8, 119–120.
Flessa, K.W. & Jablonski, D. (1995) Biogeography of recent marine
bivalve mollusks and its implications of paleobiogeography andthe geography of extinction: a progress report. Historical Biology ,
10, 25–47.
Flint, M.L. & van den Bosch, R. (1981) Introduction to Integrated Pest
Management . Plenum Press, New York.
Floder, S., Urabe, J. & Kawabata, Z. (2002) The inﬂuence of ﬂuc-
tuating light intensities on species composition and diversity of natural phytoplankton communities. Oecologia , 133, 395–401.
Flower, R.J., Rippey, B., Rose, N.L., Appleby, P.G. & Battarbee, R.W.
(1994) Palaeolimnological evidence for the acidiﬁcation and con-tamination of lakes by atmospheric pollution in western Ireland.Journal of Ecology , 82, 581–596.
Fonseca, C.R. (1994) Herbivory and the long-lived leaves of an
Amazonian ant-tree. Journal of Ecology , 82, 833–842.
Fonseca, D.M. & Hart, D.D. (1996) Density-dependent dispersal of
black ﬂy neonates is mediated by ﬂow. Oikos , 75, 49–58.
Ford, E.B. (1940) Polymorphism and taxonomy. In: The New Sys-
tematics ( J. Huxley, ed.), pp. 493–513. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Ford, E.B. (1975) Ecological Genetics , 4th edn. Chapman & Hall, London.
Forrester, N.W. (1993) Well known and some not so well known 
insecticides: their biochemical targets and role in IPM and IRMprogrammes. In: Pest Control and Sustainable Agriculture (S. Corey,
D. Dall & W. Milne, eds), pp. 28–34. CSIRO, East Melbourne.
Foster, B.L. & Tilman, D. (2003) Seed limitation and the regulation
of community structure in oak savanna grassland. Journal of Ecology ,
91, 999–1007.
Fowler, S.V. & Lawton, J.H. (1985) Rapidly induced defenses and 
talking trees: the devil’s advocate position. American Naturalist , 126,
181–195.
Fox, A. & Hudson, P.J. (2001) Parasites reduce territorial behaviour in
red grouse ( Lagopus lagopus scoticus ). Ecology Letters , 4, 139–143.
Fox, C.J. (2001) Recent trends in stock-recruitment of Blackwater 
herring ( Clupea harengus L.) in relation to larval production. ICES
Journal of Marine Science , 58, 750–762.Foy, C.L. & Inderjit (2001) Understanding the role of allelopathy in
weed interference and declining plant diversity. Weed Technology ,
15, 873–878.
Franklin, I.A. (1980) Evolutionary change in small populations. In:
Conservation Biology, an Evolutionary–Ecological Perspective (M.E. Soulé
& B.A. Wilcox, eds), pp. 135–149. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland,
MA.
Franklin, I.R. & Frankham, R. (1998) How large must populations
be to retain evolutionary potential. Animal Conservation , 1, 69–
73.
Franks, F., Mathias, S.F. & Hatley, R.H.M. (1990) Water, temperature
and life. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series
B, 326, 517–533; also in Life at Low Temperatures (R.M. Laws & 
F. Franks, eds), pp. 97–117. The Royal Society, London.
Freckleton, R.P. & Watkinson, A.R. (2001) Nonmanipulative deter-
mination of plant community dynamics. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 16, 301–307.
Free, C.A., Beddington, J.R. & Lawton, J.H. (1977) On the inadequacy
of simple models of mutual interference for parasitism and 
predation. Journal of Animal Ecology , 46, 543–554.
Fretwell, S.D. (1977) The regulation of plant communities by food
chains exploiting them. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine , 20,
169–185.
Fretwell, S.D. & Lucas, H.L. (1970) On territorial behaviour and other
factors inﬂuencing habitat distribution in birds. Acta Biotheoretica ,
19, 16–36.
Fridriksson, S. (1975) Surtsey: evolution of life on a volcanic island .
Butterworths, London.
Fry, G.L.A. & Cooke, A.S. (1984) Acid deposition and its implica-
tions for nature conservation in Britain. Focus on Nature Con-
servation , No. 7. Nature Conservancy Council, Attingham Park,
Shrewsbury, UK.
Fryer, G. & Iles, T.D. (1972) The Cichlid Fishes of the Great Lakes of
Africa . Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh.
Fukami, T. (2001) Sequence effects of disturbance on community 
structure. Oikos , 92, 215–224.
Fussmann, G.F. & Heber, G. (2002) Food web complexity and
chaotic population dynamics. Ecology Letters , 5, 394–401.
Futuyma, D.J. (1983) Evolutionary interactions among herbivorous
insects and plants. In: Coevolution (D.J. Futuyma & M. Slatkin, eds),
pp. 207–231. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.
Futuyma, D.J. & May, R.M. (1992) The coevolution of plant–insect
and host–parasite relationships. In: Genes in Ecology (R.J. Berry, 
T.J. Crawford & G.M. Hewitt, eds), pp. 139–166. Blackwell
Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Futuyma, D.J. & Slatkin, M. (eds) (1983) Coevolution . Sinauer,
Sunderland, MA.
Gaillard, J.-M., Festa-Bianchet, M., Yoccoz, N.G., Loison, A. &
Toïgo, C. (2000) Temporal variation in ﬁtness components andpopulation dynamics of large herbivores. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics , 31, 367–393.
Gaines, M.S., Vivas, A.M. & Baker, C.L. (1979) An experimental 
analysis of dispersal in ﬂuctuating vole populations: demographicparameters. Ecology , 60, 814–828.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 670REFERENCES 671
Galloway, J.N., Schlesinger, W.H., Levy, H., Michaels, A. &
Schnoor, J.L. (1995) Nitrogen ﬁxation: anthropogenic enhancement–
environmental response. Global Biogeochemical Cycles , 9, 235–252.
Galloway, L.F. & Fenster, C.B. (2000) Population differentiation in
an annual legume: local adaptation. Evolution , 54, 1173–1181.
Ganade, G. & Brown, V.K. (2002) Succession in old pastures of 
central Amazonia: role of soil fertility and plant litter. Ecology , 
83, 743–754.
Gandon, S. & Michalakis, Y. (2001) Multiple causes of the evolution
of dispersal. In: Dispersal ( J. Clobert, E. Danchin, A.A. Dhondt &
J.D. Nichols, eds), pp. 155–167. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Gange, A.C. & Brown, V.K. (2002) Soil food web components affect
plant community structure during early succession. Ecological
Research , 17, 217–227.
Garcia-Fernandez, C., Casado, M.A. & Perez, M.R. (2003) Benzoin
gardens in North Sumatra, Indonesia: effects of management on
tree diversity. Conservation Biology , 17, 829–836.
García-Fulgueiras, A., Navarro, C., Fenoll, D. et al. (2003) Legionnaires’
disease outbreak in Murcia, Spain. Emerging Infectious Diseases , 9,
915–921.
Garrod, D.J. & Jones, B.W. (1974) Stock and recruitment relationships
in the N.E. Atlantic cod stock and the implications for manage-ment of the stock. Journal Conseil International pour l’Exploration de
la Mer , 173, 128–144.
Gaston, K.J. & Blackburn, T.M. (2000) Pattern and Process in Macro-
ecology . Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Gathreaux, S.A. (1978) The structure and organization of avian com-
munities in forests. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Management of
Southern Forests for Nongame Birds (R.M. DeGraaf, ed.), pp. 17–37.
Southern Forest Station, Asheville, NC.
Gause, G.F. (1934) The Struggle for Existence . Williams & Wilkins,
Baltimore (reprinted 1964 by Hafner, New York).
Gause, G.F. (1935) Experimental demonstration of Volterra’s periodic
oscillation in the numbers of animals. Journal of Experimental
Biology , 12, 44–48.
Gavloski, J.E. & Lamb, R.J. (2000a) Speciﬁc impacts of herbivores:
comparing diverse insect species on young plants. Environmental
Entomology , 29, 1–7.
Gavloski, J.E. & Lamb, R.J. (2000b) Compensation for herbivory in
cruciferous plants: speciﬁc responses in three defoliating insects.Environmental Entomology , 29, 1258–1267.
Gee, J.H.R. & Giller, P.S. (eds) (1987) Organization of Communities:
past and present . Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Geider, R.J., Delucia, E.H., Falkowski, P.G. et al. (2001) Primary 
productivity of planet earth: biological determinants and phys-ical constraints in terrestrial and aquatic habitats. Global Change
Biology , 7, 849–882.
Geiger, R. (1955) The Climate Near the Ground . Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Gende, S.M., Quinn, T.P. & Willson, M.F. (2001) Consumption choice
by bears feeding on salmon. Oecologia , 127, 372–382.
Gessner, M.O. & Chauvet, E. (2002) A case for using litter breakdown
to assess functional stream integrity. Ecological Applications , 12,
498–510.Gianoli, E. & Neimeyer, H.M. (1997) Lack of costs of herbivory-induced
defenses in a wild wheat: integration of physiological and ecological
approaches. Oikos , 80, 269–275.
Gibbens, J.C. & Wilesmith, J.W. (2002) Temporal and geographical
distribution of cases of foot-and-mouth disease during the early
weeks of the 2001 epidemic in Great Britain. Veterinary Record , 151,
407–412.
Gibbs, H.L., Sorenson, M.D., Marchetti, K., Brooke, M. de L., Davies,
N.B. & Nakamura, H. (2000) Genetic evidence for female host-
speciﬁc races of the common cuckoo. Nature , 407, 183–186.
Gilg, O., Hanski, I. & Sittler, B. (2003) Cyclic dynamics in a simple
vertebrate predator–prey community. Science , 302, 866–868.
Gillespie, J.H. (1977) Natural selection for variances in offspring
numbers: a new evolutionary principle. American Naturalist , 111,
1010–1014.
Gilligan, C.A. (1990) Comparison of disease progress curves. New
Phytologist , 115, 223–242.
Gillooly, J.F., Brown, J.H., West, G.B., Savage, V.M. & Charnov, E.L.
(2001) Effects of size and temperature on metabolic rate. Science ,
293, 2248–2251.
Gillooly, J.F., Charnov, E.L., West, G.B., Savage, V.M. & Brown, J.H.
(2002) Effects of size and temperature on developmental time.
Nature , 417, 70–73.
Gilman, M.P. & Crawley, M.J. (1990) The cost of sexual reproduction
in ragwort ( Senecio jacobaea L.). Functional Ecology , 4, 585–589.
Glawe, G.A., Zavala, J.A., Kessler, A., Van Dam, N.M. & Baldwin,
I.T. (2003) Ecological costs and beneﬁts correlated with trypsin
proteinase inhibitor production in Nicotinia attenuata . Ecology ,
84, 79–90.
Gleason, H.A. (1926) The individualistic concept of the plant asso-
ciation. Torrey Botanical Club Bulletin , 53, 7–26.
Godfray, H.C.J. (1987) The evolution of clutch size in invertebrates.
Oxford Surveys in Evolutionary Biology , 4, 117–154.
Godfray, H.C.J. (1994) Parasitoids: behavioral and evolutionary ecology .
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Godfray, H.C.J. & Crawley, M.J. (1998) Introduction. In: Conserva-
tion Science and Action (W.J. Sutherland, ed.), pp. 39–65. Blackwell
Science, Oxford.
Godfray, H.C.J. & Hassell, M.P. (1989) Discrete and continuous insect
populations in tropical environments. Journal of Animal Ecology , 58,
153–174.
Godfray, H.C.J. & Pacala, S.W. (1992) Aggregation and the popula-
tion dynamics of parasitoids and predators. American Naturalist ,
140, 30–40.
Goldman, J.C., Caron, D.A. & Dennett, M.R. (1987) Regulation of
gross growth efﬁciency and ammonium regeneration in bacteriaby substrate C : N ratio. Limnology and Oceanography , 32, 1239–1252.
Gomez, J.M. & Gonzalez-Megias, A. (2002) Asymmetrical interactions
between ungulates and phytophagous insects: being differentmatters. Ecology , 83, 203–211.
Gorman, M.L. (1979) Island Ecology . Chapman & Hall, London.
Gosler, A.G., Barnett, P.R. & Reynolds, S.J. (2000) Inheritance and 
variation in eggshell patterning in the great tit Parus major. Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 267, 2469–2473.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 671672 REFERENCES
Goss-Custard, J.D. (1970) Feeding dispersion in some over-wintering
wading birds. In: Social Behaviour in Birds and Mammals ( J.H. Crook,
ed.), pp. 3–34. Academic Press, New York.
Gotelli, N.J. (2001) Research frontiers in null model analysis. Global
Ecology and Biogeography , 10, 337–343.
Gotelli, N.J. & McCabe, D.J. (2002) Species co-occurrence: a meta-
analysis of J.M. Diamond’s assembly rules model. Ecology , 83,
2091–2096.
Gough, L. Shaver, G.R., Carroll, J., Royer, D.L. & Laundre, J.A. 
(2000) Vascular plant species richness in Alaskan arctic tundra: 
the importance of soil pH. Journal of Ecology , 88, 54–66.
Gould, F. (1991) The evolutionary potential of crop pests. American
Scientist , 79, 496–507.
Gould, S.J. (1966) Allometry and size in ontogeny and phylogeny.
Biological Reviews , 41, 587–640.
Gould, W.A. & Walker, M.D. (1997) Landscape-scale patterns in plant
species richness along an arctic river. Canadian Journal of Botany ,
75, 1748–1765.
Gower, S.T., McMurtrie, R.E. & Murty, D. (1996) Aboveground 
net primary production declines with stand age: potential causes.Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 11, 378–382.
Grace, J.B. & Wetzel, R.G. (1998) Long-term dynamics of Typha
populations. Aquatic Botany , 61, 137–146.
Graham, I. & Lambin, X. (2002) The impact of weasel predation on
cyclic ﬁeld-vole survival: the specialist predator hypothesis con-tradicted. Journal of Animal Ecology , 71, 946–956.
Grant, P.R., Grant, R., Keller, L.F. & Petren, K. (2000) Effects of 
El Nino events on Darwin’s ﬁnch productivity. Ecology , 81,
2442–2457.
Gray, S.M. & Robinson, B.W. (2001) Experimental evidence that com-
petition between stickleback species favours adaptive characterdivergence. Ecology Letters , 5, 264–272.
Greene, D.F. & Calogeropoulos, C. (2001) Measuring and model-
ling seed dispersal of terrestrial plants. In: Dispersal Ecology
( J.M. Bullock, R.E. Kenward & R.S. Hails, eds), pp. 3–23.Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Greenwood, P.J. (1980) Mating systems, philopatry and dispersal in
birds and mammals. Animal Behaviour , 28, 1140–1162.
Greenwood, P.J., Harvey, P.H. & Perrins, C.M. (1978) Inbreeding and
dispersal in the great tit. Nature , 271, 52–54.
Grenfell, B. & Harwood, J. (1997) (Meta)population dynamics of 
infectious diseases. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 12, 395–399.
Grier, C.C. (1975) Wildﬁre effects on nutrient distribution and leach-
ing in a coniferous forest ecosystem. Canadian Journal of Forest
Research , 5, 599–607.
Grifﬁth, D.M. & Poulson, T.M. (1993) Mechanisms and consequences
of intraspeciﬁc competition in a carabid cave beetle. Ecology , 74,
1373–1383.
Grifﬁths, R.A., Denton, J. & Wong, A.L.-C. (1993) The effect of food
level on competition in tadpoles: interference mediated by pro-tothecan algae? Journal of Animal Ecology , 62, 274–279.
Grime, J.P., Hodgson, J.G. & Hunt, R. (1988) Comparative Plant
Ecology: a functional approach to common British species . Unwin-
Hyman, London.Grubb, P. (1977) The maintenance of species richness in plant 
communities: the importance of the regeneration niche. Biological
Reviews , 52, 107–145.
Grubb, P.J. (1986) The ecology of establishment. In: Ecology and
Design in Landscape (A.D. Bradshaw, D.A. Goode & E. Thorpe,
eds), pp. 83–97. Symposia of the British Ecological Society, 
No. 24. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Grutter, A.S. (1999) Cleaner ﬁsh really do clean. Nature , 398, 672–673.
Grytnes, J.A. (2003) Species-richness patterns of vascular plants along
seven altitudinal transects in Norway. 
Ecography , 26, 291–300.
Grytnes, J.A. & Vetaas, O.R. (2002) Species richness and altitude: a
comparison between null models and interpolated plant species
richness along the Himalayan altitudinal gradient, Nepal. American
Naturalist , 159, 294–304.
Guiñez, R. & Castilla, J.C. (2001) An allometric tridimensional
model of self-thinning for a gregarious tunicate. Ecology , 82,
2331–2341.
Gunn, A. (1998) Caribou and muskox harvesting in the Northwest
Territories. In: Conservation of Biological Resources (E.J. Milner-
Gulland & R. Mace, eds), pp. 314–330. Blackwell Science,
Oxford.
Haefner, P.A. (1970) The effect of low dissolved oxygen concentrations
on temperature–salinity tolerance of the sand shrimp, Crangon
septemspinosa. Physiological Zoology , 43, 30–37.
Haines, E. (1979) Interaction between Georgia salt marshes and
coastal waters: a changing paradigm. In: Ecological Processes in Coastal
and Marine Systems (R.J. Livingston, ed.). Plenum Press, New
York.
Hainsworth, F.R. (1981) Animal Physiology . Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA.
Hairston, N.G., Smith, F.E. & Slobodkin, L.B. (1960) Community struc-
ture, population control, and competition. American Naturalist , 44,
421–425.
Halaj, J., Ross, D.W. & Moldenke, A.R. (2000) Importance of habitat
structure to the arthropod food-web in Douglas-ﬁr canopies.Oikos , 90, 139–152.
Haldane, J.B.S. (1949) Disease and evolution. La Ricerca Scienza , 19
(Suppl.), 3–11.
Hall, S.J. (1998) Closed areas for ﬁsheries management – the case 
consolidates. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 13, 297–298.
Hall, S.J. & Raffaelli, D.G. (1993) Food webs: theory and reality.
Advances in Ecological Research , 24, 187–239.
Hamilton, W.D. (1971) Geometry for the selﬁsh herd. Journal of
Theoretical Biology , 31, 295–311.
Hamilton, W.D. & May, R.M. (1977) Dispersal in stable habitats. Nature ,
269, 578–581.
Hansen, J., Ruedy, R., Glasgoe, J. & Sato, M. (1999) GISS analysis of
surface temperature change. Journal of Geophysical Research , 104,
30997–31022.
Hanski, I. (1991) Single-species metapopulation dynamics: concepts,
models and observations. In: Metapopulation Dynamics (M.E. Gilpin
& I. Hanski, eds), pp. 17–38. Academic Press, London.
Hanski, I. (1994) A practical model of metapopulation dynamics. Journal
of Animal Ecology , 63, 151–162.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 672REFERENCES 673
Hanski, I. (1996) Metapopulation ecology. In: Population dynamics in
ecological space and time (O.E. Rhodes Jr., R.K. Chesser & M.H.
Smith, eds), pp. 13–43. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Hanski, I. (1999) Metapopulation Ecology . Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Hanski, I. & Gyllenberg, M. (1993) Two general metapopulation models
and the core-satellite hypothesis. American Naturalist , 142, 17–41.
Hanski, I. & Simberloff, D. (1997) The metapopulation approach, 
its history, conceptual domain, and application to conservation.
In: Metapopulation Biology (I.A. Hanski & M.E. Gilpin, eds), pp. 5–26.
Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Hanski, I., Hansson, L. & Henttonen, H. (1991) Specialist predators,
generalist predators, and the microtine rodent cycle. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 60, 353–367.
Hanski, I., Henttonen, H., Korpimaki, E., Oksanen, L. & Turchin, P.
(2001) Small-rodent dynamics and predation. Ecology , 82, 1505–
1520.
Hanski, I., Pakkala, T., Kuussaari, M. & Lei, G. (1995) Metapopula-
tion persistence of an endangered butterﬂy in a fragmented landscape. Oikos , 72, 21–28.
Harcourt, D.G. (1971) Population dynamics of Leptinotarsa decemlineata
(Say) in eastern Ontario. III. Major population processes. Canadian
Entomologist , 103, 1049–1061.
Harper, D.G.C. (1982) Competitive foraging in mallards: ‘ideal free
ducks’. Animal Behaviour , 30, 575–584.
Harper, J.L. (1955) The inﬂuence of the environment on seed and
seedling mortality. VI. The effects of the interaction of soil moisturecontent and temperature on the mortality of maize grains. Annals
of Applied Biology , 43, 696–708.
Harper, J.L. (1961) Approaches to the study of plant competition. 
In: Mechanisms in Biological Competition (F.L. Milthorpe, ed.), 
pp. 1–39. Symposium No. 15, Society for Experimental Biology.Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Harper, J.L. (1977) The Population Biology of Plants . Academic Press,
London.
Harper, J.L. & White, J. (1974) The demography of plants. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics , 5, 419–463.
Harper, J.L., Jones, M. & Sackville Hamilton, N.R. (1991) The 
evolution of roots and the problems of analysing their behaviour.In: Plant Root Growth: an ecological perspective (D. Atkinson, ed.),
pp. 3–22. Special Publication of the British Ecological Society, No. 10. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Harper, J.L., Rosen, R.B. & White, J. (eds) (1986) The growth and
form of modular organisms. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London, Series B , 313, 1–250.
Harris, G.P. (2001) Biogeochemistry of nitrogen and phosphorus in
Australian catchments, rivers and estuaries: effects of land use andﬂow regulation and comparisons with global patterns. Marine and
Freshwater Research , 52, 139–149.
Harrison, S. & Taylor, A.D. (1997) Empirical evidence for meta-
populations. In: Metapopulation Biology (I.A. Hanski & M.E. Gilpin,
eds), pp. 27–42. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Hart, A.J., Bale, J.S., Tullett, A.G., Worland, M.R. & Walters, K.F.A.
(2002) Effects of temperature on the establishment potential of the predatory mite Amblyseius californicus McGregor (Acari:
Phytoseiidae) in the UK. Journal of Insect Physiology , 48, 593–
599.
Harvey, P.H. (1996) Phylogenies for ecologists. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 65, 255–263.
Harvey, P.H. & Pagel, M.D. (1991) The Comparative Method in Evolu-
tionary Biology . Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Harvey, P.H. & Zammuto, R.M. (1985) Patterns of mortality and age
at ﬁrst reproduction in natural populations of mammals. Nature ,
315, 319–320.
Hassell, M.P. (1978) The Dynamics of Arthropod Predator–Prey Systems .
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Hassell, M.P. (1982) Patterns of parasitism by insect parasitoids in patchy
environments. Ecological Entomology , 7, 365–377.
Hassell, M.P. (1985) Insect natural enemies as regulating factors. Journal
of Animal Ecology , 54, 323–334.
Hassell, M.P. & May, R.M. (1973) Stability in insect host–parasite 
models. Journal of Animal Ecology , 43, 567–594.
Hassell, M.P. & May, R.M. (1974) Aggregation of predators and
insect parasites and its effect on stability. Journal of Animal Ecology ,
43, 567–594.
Hassell, M.P., Latto, J. & May, R.M. (1989) Seeing the wood for the
trees: detecting density dependence from existing life-table studies.Journal of Animal Ecology , 58, 883–892.
Hastings, A. & Botsford, L.W. (2003) Comparing designs of marine
reserves for ﬁsheries and for biodiversity. Ecological Applications ,
13 (Suppl.), S65–S70.
Hastings, A., Hom, C.L., Ellner, S., Turchin, P. & Godfray, H.C.J.
(1993) Chaos in ecology: is mother nature a strange attractor? Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics , 24, 1–33.
Hastings, H.M. & Conrad, M. (1979) Length and evolutionary stability
of food chains. Nature , 282, 838–839.
Hattenschwiler, S. & Vitousek, P.M. (2000) The role of polyphenols
in terrestrial ecosystem nutrient cycling. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 15, 238–243.
Hawkins, B.A. & Cornell, H.V. (eds) (1999) Theoretical Approaches 
to Biological Control . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
Heal, O.W. & MacLean, S.F. (1975) Comparative productivity in eco-
systems – secondary productivity. In: Unifying Concepts in Ecology
(W.H. van Dobben & R.H. Lowe–McConnell, eds), pp. 89–108.Junk, The Hague.
Heal, O.W., Menault, J.C. & Steffen, W.L. (1993) Towards a Global
Terrestrial Observing System (GTOS): detecting and monitoring changein terrestrial ecosystems . MAB Digest 14 and IGBP Global Change
Report 26, UNESCO, Paris and IGBP, Stockholm.
Hearnden, M., Skelly, C. & Weinstein, P. (1999) Improving the
surveillance of mosquitoes with disease-vector potential in NewZealand. New Zealand Public Health Report , 6, 25–28.
Hector, A., Shmid, B., Beierkuhnlein, C. et al. (1999) Plant diversity
and productivity experiments in European grasslands. Science ,
286, 1123–1127.
Heed, W.B. (1968) Ecology of Hawaiian Drosophiladae. University of
Texas Publications , 6861, 387–419.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 673674 REFERENCES
Heie, O.E. (1987) Palaeontology and phylogeny. In: Aphids: their 
biology, natural enemies and control. World Crop Pests , Vol. 2A (A.K.
Minks & P. Harrewijn, eds), pp. 367–391. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Heil, M. & McKey, D. (2003) Protective ant–plant interactions as model
systems in ecological and evolutionary research. Annual Review of
Ecology, Evolution and Systematics , 34, 425–453.
Hendon, B.C. & Briske, D.D. (2002) Relative herbivory tolerance 
and competitive ability in two dominant : subordinate pairs of 
perennial grasses in a native grassland. Plant Ecology , 160, 43–51.
Hengeveld, R. (1990) Dynamic Biogeography . Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Henttonen, H. & Kaikusalo, A. (1993) Lemming movements. In: The
Biology of Lemmings (N.C. Stenseth & R.A. Ims, eds), pp. 157–186.
Academic Press, London.
Heppell, S.S., Crowder, L.B. & Crouse, D.T. (1996) Models to evaluate
headstarting as a management tool for long-lived turtles. Ecological
Applications , 6, 556–565.
Herman, T.J.B. (2000) Developing IPM for potato tuber moth.
Commercial Grower , 55, 26–28.
Hermoyian, C.S., Leighton, L.R. & Kaplan, P. (2002) Testing the role
of competition in fossil communities using limiting similarity.Geology , 30, 15–18.
Herre, E.A. & West, S.A. (1997) Conﬂict of interest in a mutualism:
documenting the elusive ﬁg wasp–seed trade-off. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society of London, Series B , 264, 1501–1507.
Herre, E.A., Knowlton, N., Mueller, U.G. & Rehner, S.A. (1999) The
evolution of mutualisms: exploring the paths between conﬂict andcooperation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 14, 49–53.
Herrera, C.M., Jordano, P., Guitian, J. & Traveset, A. (1998) Annual
variability in seed production by woody plants and the mastingconcept: reassessment of principles and relationship to pollinationand seed dispersal. American Naturalist , 152, 576–594.
Hessen, D.O. (1997) Stoichiometry in food webs. Lotka revisited. Oikos ,
79, 195–200.
Hestbeck, J.B. (1982) Population regulation of cyclic mammals: the
social fence hypothesis. Oikos , 39, 157–163.
Hilborn, R. & Walters, C.J. (1992) Quantitative Fisheries Stock Assess-
ment . Chapman & Hall, New York.
Hildrew, A.G. & Townsend, C.R. (1980) Aggregation, interference
and the foraging by larvae of Plectrocnemia conspersa (Trichoptera:
Polycentropodidae). Animal Behaviour , 28, 553–560.
Hildrew, A.G., Townsend, C.R., Francis, J. & Finch, K. (1984)
Cellulolytic decomposition in streams of contrasting pH and itsrelationship with invertebrate community structure. Freshwater
Biology , 14, 323–328.
Hill, M.F., Witman, J.D. & Caswell, H. (2002) Spatio-temporal vari-
ation in Markov chain models of subtidal community succession.Ecology Letters , 5, 665–675.
Hill, W.R., Mulholland, P.J. & Marzolf, E.R. (2001) Stream ecosystem
responses to forest leaf emergence in spring. Ecology , 82, 2306–2319.
Hirakawa, H. (2001) Coprophagy in leporids and other mammalian
herbivores. Mammal Review , 31, 61–80.
Hockland, S.H., Dawson, G.W., Grifﬁths, D.C., Maples, B., Pickett,
J.A. & Woodcock, C.M. (1986) The use of aphid alarm pheremone(E-β-farnesene) to increase effectiveness of the entomophilic fungusVerticillium lecanii in controlling aphids on chrysanthemums under
glass. In: Fundamental and Applied Aspects of Invertebrate Pathology
(R.A. Sampson, J.M. Vlak & D. Peters, eds), p. 252. Foundation of
the Fourth International Colloquium of Invertebrate Pathology,
Wageningen.
Hodgkinson, K.C. (1992) Water relations and growth of shrubs before
and after ﬁre in a semi-arid woodland. Oecologia , 90, 467–473.
Hogan, M.E., Veivers, P.C., Slaytor, M. & Czolij, R.T. (1988) The site
of cellulose breakdown in higher termites ( Nasutitermes walkeri and
Nasutitermes exitosus ). Journal of Insect Physiology , 34, 891–899.
Holland, D.S. & Brazee, R.J. (1996) Marine reserves for ﬁshery man-
agement. Marine Resource Economics , 11, 157–171.
Holling, C.S. (1959) Some characteristics of simple types of predation
and parasitism. Canadian Entomologist , 91, 385–398.
Holmer, M. & Storkholm, P. (2001) Sulphate reduction and sul-
phur cycling in lake sediments: a review. Freshwater Biology , 46,
431–451.
Holmgren, M., Scheffer, M., Ezcurra, E., Gutierrez, J.R. & Mohren, M.J.
(2001) El Nino effects on the dynamics of terrestrial ecosystems.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 16, 89–94.
Holloway, J.D. (1977) The Lepidoptera of Norfolk Island, their Bio-
geography and Ecology . Junk, The Hague.
Holloway, J.M., Dahlgren, R.A., Hansen, B. & Casey, W.H. (1998)
Contribution of bedrock nitrogen to high nitrate concentrationsin stream water. Nature , 395, 785–788.
Holt, R.D. (1977) Predation, apparent competition and the structure
of prey communities. Theoretical Population Biology , 12, 197–229.
Holt, R.D. (1984) Spatial heterogeneity, indirect interactions, and the
coexistence of prey species. American Naturalist , 124, 377–406.
Holt, R.D. (1997) Community modules. In: Multitrophic Interactions 
in Terrestrial Ecosystems (A.C. Gange & V.K. Brown, eds), pp. 333–
349. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Holt, R.D. & Hassell, M.P. (1993) Environmental heterogeneity 
and the stability of host–parasitoid interactions. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 62, 89–100.
Holway, D.A. & Suarez, A.V. (1999) Animal behaviour: an essential
component of invasion biology. Trends in Ecology and Evolution ,
14, 328–330.
Holyoak, M. & Lawler, S.P. (1996) Persistence of an extinction-prone
predator–prey interaction through metapopulation dynamics.Ecology , 77, 1867–1879.
Hook, P.B. & Burke, I.C. (2000) Biogeochemistry in a shortgrass 
landscape: control by topography, soil texture, and microclimate.Ecology , 81, 2686–2703.
Hopf, F.A., Valone, T.J. & Brown, J.H. (1993) Competition theory
and the structure of ecological communities. Evolutionary Ecology ,
7, 142–154.
Horn, D.S. (1988) Ecological Approach to Pest Management . Elsevier,
London.
Horn, H.S. (1975) Markovian processes of forest succession. In: Ecology
and Evolution of Communities (M.L. Cody & J.M. Diamond, eds),
pp. 196–213. Belknap, Cambridge, MA.
Horn, H.S. (1981) Succession. In: Theoretical Ecology: principles and 
applications (R.M. May, ed.), pp. 253–271. Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, Oxford.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 674REFERENCES 675
Houghton, R.A. (2000) Interannual variability in the global carbon
cycle. Journal of Geophysical Research , 105, 20121–20130.
Hoyer, M.V. & Canﬁeld, D.E. (1994) Bird abundance and species 
richness on Florida lakes: inﬂuence of trophic status, lake morpho-
logy and aquatic macrophytes. Hydrobiologia , 297, 107–119.
Hu, S., Firestone, M.K. & Chapin, F.S. III (1999) Soil microbial 
feedbacks to atmospheric CO2enrichment. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 14, 433–437.
Hudson, P. & Greenman, J. (1998) Competition mediated by para-
sites: biological and theoretical progress. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 13, 387–390.
Hudson, P.J., Dobson, A.P. & Newborn, D. (1992a) Do parasites make
prey vulnerable to predation? Red grouse and parasites. Journal of
Animal Ecology , 61, 681–692.
Hudson, P.J., Newborn, D. & Dobson, A.P. (1992b) Regulation and
stability of a free-living host–parasite system: Trichostrongylus tenuis
in red grouse. I. Monitoring and parasite reduction experiments.
Journal of Animal Ecology , 61, 477–486.
Hudson, P.J., Dobson, A.P. & Newborn, D. (1998) Prevention of 
population cycles by parasite removal. Science , 282, 2256–2258.
Huffaker, C.B. (1958) Experimental studies on predation: dispersion
factors and predator–prey oscillations. Hilgardia , 27, 343–383.
Huffaker, C.B., Shea, K.P. & Herman, S.G. (1963) Experimental
studies on predation. Hilgardia , 34, 305–330.
Hughes, J.E., Deegan, L.A., Peterson, B.J., Holmes, R.M. & Fry, B.
(2000) Nitrogen ﬂow through the food web in the oligohaline zoneof a New England estuary. Ecology , 81, 433–452.
Hughes, L. (2000) Biological consequences of global warming: is the
signal already apparent. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 15, 56–61.
Hughes, R.N. (1989) A Functional Biology of Clonal Animals . Chapman
& Hall, London.
Hughes, R.N. & Croy, M.I. (1993) An experimental analysis of 
frequency-dependent predation (switching) in the 15-spined stickle-back, Spinachia spinachia. Journal of Animal Ecology , 62, 341–352.
Hughes, R.N. & Grifﬁths, C.L. (1988) Self-thinning in barnacles 
and mussels: the geometry of packing. American Naturalist , 132,
484–491.
Hughes, T.P. & Connell, J.H. (1987) Population dynamics based 
on size or age? A reef-coral analysis. American Naturalist , 129,
818–829.
Hughes, T.P., Ayre, D. & Connell, J.H. (1992) The evolutionary eco-
logy of corals. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 7, 292–295.
Hughey, K.F.D., Cullen, R. & Moran, E. (2002) Integrating economics
into priority setting and evaluation in conservation management.Conservation Biology , 17, 93–103.
Huisman, J. (1999) Population dynamics of light-limited phyto-
plankton: microcosm experiments. Ecology , 80, 202–210.
Humborg, C., Blomqvist, S., Avsan, E., Bergensund, Y. & Smedberg, E.
(2002) Hydrological alterations with river damming in northernSweden: implications for weathering and river biogeochemistry.Global Biogeochemical Cycles , 16, 1–13.
Hunter, J.R., Argue, A.W., Bayliff, W.H. et al. (1986) The Dynamics
of Tuna Movement: an evaluation of past and future research . FAO
Fisheries Technical Paper No. 277. Food and AgricultureOrganization of the United Nations, Rome.Hunter, M.D. & Price, P.W. (1992) Playing chutes and ladders: 
heterogeneity and the relative roles of bottom-up and top-down
forces in natural communities. Ecology , 73, 724–732.
Hunter, M.D. & Price, P.W. (1998) Cycles in insect populations: delayed
density dependence or exogenous driving variables? Ecological
Entomology , 23, 216–222.
Hunter, M.L. & Yonzon, P. (1992) Altitudinal distributions of birds,
mammals, people, forests, and parks in Nepal. Conservation Biology ,
7, 420–423.
Hurd, L.E. & Eisenberg, R.M. (1990) Experimentally synchronized
phenology and interspeciﬁc competition in mantids. American
Midland Naturalist , 124, 390–394.
Huryn, A.D. (1998) Ecosystem level evidence for top-down and 
bottom-up control of production in a grassland stream system.
Oecologia , 115, 173–183.
Husband, B.C. & Barrett, S.C.H. (1996) A metapopulation per-
spective in plant population biology. Journal of Ecology , 84,
461–469.
Huston, M. (1979) A general hypothesis of species diversity. American
Naturalist , 113, 81–102.
Hutchings, M.J. (1983) Ecology’s law in search of a theory. New Scientist ,
98, 765–767.
Hutchings, M.J. & de Kroon, H. (1994) Foraging in plants: the role
of morphological plasticity in resource acquisition. Advances in
Ecological Research , 25, 159–238.
Hutchinson, G.E. (1957) Concluding remarks. Cold Spring Harbour
Symposium on Quantitative Biology , 22, 415–427.
Hutchinson, G.E. (1959) Homage to Santa Rosalia, or why are there
so many kinds of animals? American Naturalist , 93, 145–159.
Hutchinson, G.E. (1961) The paradox of the plankton. American
Naturalist , 95, 137–145.
IGBP (International Geosphere–Biosphere Programme) (1990)
Global Change. Report No. 12. The Initial Core Projects. The Inter-national Geosphere–Biosphere Programme: a study of global change of the International Council of Scientiﬁc Unions (ICSU) . IGBP,
Stockholm, Sweden.
Ims, R. & Yoccoz, N. (1997) Studying transfer processes in meta-
populations: emigration, migration and colonization. In: Meta-
population Biology (I. Hanski & M. Gilpin, eds), pp. 247–265.
Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Inchausti, P. & Ginzburg, L.R. (1998) Small mammal cycles in northern
Europe: patterns and evidence for a maternal effect hypothesis.Journal of Animal Ecology , 67, 180–194.
Inghe, O. (1989) Genet and ramet survivorship under different 
mortality regimes: a cellular automata model. Journal of Theoretical
Biology , 138, 257–270.
Inglesﬁeld, C. & Begon, M. (1983) The ontogeny and cost of migration
of Drosophila subobscura Collin. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society ,
19, 9–15.
Interlandi, S.J. & Kilham, S.S. (2001) Limiting resources and the 
regulation of diversity in phytoplankton communities. Ecology , 82,
1270–1282.
International Organisation for Biological Control (1989) Current
Status of Integrated Farming Systems Research in Western Europe(P. Vereijken & D.J. Royle, eds). IOBC WPRS Bulletin 12(5).
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 675676 REFERENCES
IPCC (2001) Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change . Working Group 1, Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, Geneva.
IUCN/UNEP/WWF (1991) Caring for the Earth. A Strategy for
Sustainable Living . Gland, Switzerland.
Ives, A.R. (1992a) Density-dependent and density-independent para-
sitoid aggregation in model host–parasitoid systems. American
Naturalist , 140, 912–937.
Ives, A.R. (1992b) Continuous-time models of host–parasitoid inter-
actions. American Naturalist , 140, 1–29.
Jackson, C.R., Churchill, P.F. & Roden, E.E. (2001) Successional
changes in bacterial assemblage structure during epilithic bioﬁlm
development. Ecology , 82, 555–566.
Jackson, S.T. & Weng, C. (1999) Late Quaternary extinction of a 
tree species in eastern North America. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA , 96, 13847–13852.
Jamieson, I.G. & Ryan, C.J. (2001) Island takahe: closure of the debate
over the merits of introducing Fiordland takahe to predator-freeislands. In: The Takahe: ﬁfty years of conservation management and
research (W.G. Lee & I.G. Jamieson, eds), pp. 96–113. University
of Otago Press, Dunedin, New Zealand.
Janis, C.M. (1993) Tertiary mammal evolution in the context of
changing climates, vegetation and tectonic events. Annual Review
of Ecology and Systematics , 24, 467–500.
Jannasch, H.W. & Mottl, M.J. (1985) Geomicrobiology of deep-sea
hydrothermal vents. Science , 229, 717–725.
Janzen, D.H. (1967) Interaction of the bull’s-horn acacia ( Acacia
cornigera L.) with an ant inhabitant ( Pseudomyrmex ferruginea
F. Smith) in eastern Mexico. University of Kansas Science Bulletin ,
47, 315–558.
Janzen, D.H. (1968) Host plants in evolutionary and contemporary
time. American Naturalist , 102, 592–595.
Janzen, D.H. (1970) Herbivores and the number of tree species in 
tropical forests. American Naturalist , 104, 501–528.
Janzen, D.H. (1980) Speciﬁcity of seed-eating beetles in a Costa
Rican deciduous forest. Journal of Ecology , 68, 929–952.
Janzen, D.H. (1981) Evolutionary physiology of personal defence. 
In: Physiological Ecology: an evolutionary approach to resource use
(C.R. Townsend & P. Calow, eds), pp. 145–164. BlackwellScientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Janzen, D.H., Juster, H.B. & Bell, E.A. (1977) Toxicity of secondary
compounds to the seed-eating larvae of the bruchid beetleCallosobruchus maculatus. Phytochemistry , 16, 223–227.
Jeffries, M.J. & Lawton, J.H. (1984) Enemy-free space and the struc-
ture of ecological communities. Biological Journal of the Linnean
Society , 23, 269–286.
Jeffries, M.J. & Lawton, J.H. (1985) Predator–prey ratios in com-
munities of freshwater invertebrates: the role of enemy freespace. Freshwater Biology , 15, 105–112.
Jenkins, B., Kitching, R.L. & Pimm, S.L. (1992) Productivity, dis-
turbance and food web structure at a local spatical scale in 
experimental container habitats. Oikos , 65, 249–255.
Jennings, S., Kaiser, M.J. & Reynolds, J.D. (2001) Marine Fisheries Ecology .
Blackwell Science, Oxford.Jensen, K.T. & Mouritsen, K.M. (1992) Mass mortality in two common
soft-bottom invertebrates, Hydrobia ulvae and Corophium volutator
– the possible role of trematodes. Helgoländer Meeresuntersuchungen ,
46, 329–339.
Jobbagy, E.G., Sala, O.E. & Paruelo, J.M. (2002) Patterns and con-
trols of primary production in the Patagonian steppe: a remote
sensing approach. Ecology , 83, 307–319.
Johannes, R.E. (1998) Government-supported village-based manage-
ment of marine resources in Vanuatu. Ocean Coastal Management ,
40, 165–186.
Johnson, C.G. (1967) International dispersal of insects and insect-borne
viruses. Netherlands Journal of Plant Pathology , 73 (Suppl. 1), 21–43.
Johnson, C.M., Zarin, D.J. & Johnson, A.H. (2000) Post-disturbance
aboveground biomass accumulation in global secondary forests.Ecology , 81, 1395–1401.
Johnson, N.C., Zak, D.R., Tilman, D. & Pﬂeger, F.L. (1991) Dynamics
of vesicular–arbuscular mycorrhizae during old ﬁeld succession.
Oecologia , 86, 349–358.
Johnston, D.W. & Odum, E.P. (1956) Breeding bird populations in
relation to plant succession on the piedmont of Georgia. Ecology ,
37, 50–62.
Jones, C.G., Lawton, J.H. & Shachak, M. (1994) Organisms as eco-
system engineers. Oikos , 69, 373–386.
Jones, C.G., Lawton, J.H. & Schachak, M. (1997) Positive and negative
effects of organisms as physical ecosystem engineers. Ecology , 78,
1946–1957.
Jones, C.G., Ostfeld, R.S., Richard, M.P., Schauber, E.M. & Wolff, J.O.
(1998) Chain reactions linking acorns to gypsy moth outbreaks andLyme disease risk. Science , 279, 1023–1026.
Jones, M. & Harper, J.L. (1987) The inﬂuence of neighbours on the
growth of trees. I. The demography of buds in Betula pendula.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 232, 1–18.
Jones, M., Mandelik, Y. & Dayan, T. (2001) Coexistence of tempor-
ally partitioned spiny mice: roles of habitat structure and foragingbehaviour. Ecology , 82, 2164–2176.
Jones, W.T. (1988) Density-related changes in survival of philopatric
and dispersing kangaroo rats. Ecology , 69, 1474–1478.
Jones, W.T., Waser, P.M., Elliott, L.F., Link, N.E. & Bush, B.B. (1988)
Philopatry, dispersal, and habitat saturation in the banner-tailedkangaroo rat, Dipodomys spectabilis . Ecology , 69, 1466–1473.
Jonsson, M. & Malmqvist, B. (2000) Ecosystem process rate increases
with animal species richness: evidence from leaf-eating, aquaticinsects. Oikos , 89, 519–523.
Jordan, R.S. (1991) Impact of ENSO events on the southeastern Paciﬁc
region with special reference to the interaction of ﬁshing and climatic variability. In: ENSO Teleconnections Linking Worldwide
Climate Anomalies: scientiﬁc basis and societal impacts (M. Glantz, ed.),
pp. 401–430, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Jowett, I.G. (1997) Instream ﬂow methods: a comparison of approaches.
Regulated Rivers: Research and Management , 13, 115–127.
Juniper, S.K., Tunnicliffe, V. & Southward, E.C. (1992) Hydro-
thermal vents in turbidite sediments on a Northeast Paciﬁcspreading centre: organisms and substratum at an ocean drillingsite. Canadian Journal of Zoology , 70, 1792–1809.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 676REFERENCES 677
Junk, W.J., Bayley, P.B. & Sparks, R.E. (1989) The ﬂood–pulse con-
cept in river-ﬂoodplain systems. Canadian Special Publications in
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences , 106, 110–127.
Jurgens, K. & Sala, M.M. (2000) Predation-mediated shifts in size 
distribution of microbial biomass and activity during detritus
decomposition. Oikos , 91, 29–40.
Jutila, H.M. (2003) Germination in Baltic coastal wetland meadows:
similarities and differences between vegetation and seed bank. 
Plant Ecology , 166, 275–293.
Kaelke, C.M., Kruger, E.L. & Reich, P.B. (2001) Trade-offs in seed-
ling survival, growth, and physiology among hardwood species ofcontrasting successional status along a light availability gradient.Canadian Journal of Forestry Research , 31, 1602–1616.
Kaiser, J. (2000) Rift over biodiversity divides ecologists. Science , 289,
1282–1283.
Kamijo, T., Kitayama, K., Sugawara, A., Urushimichi, S. & Sasai, K.
(2002) Primary succession of the warm-temperate broad-leavedforest on a volcanic island, Miyake-jima, Japan. Folia Geobotanica ,
37, 71–91.
Kaplan, R.H. & Salthe, S.N. (1979) The allometry of reproduction:
an empirical view in salamanders. American Naturalist , 113, 671–
689.
Karban, R. & Baldwin, I.T. (1997) Induced Responses to Herbivory .
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Karban, R., Agrawal, A.A., Thaler, J.S. & Adler, L.S. (1999) Induced
plant responses and information content about risk of herbivory.Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 14, 443–447.
Kareiva, P. (1990) Population dynamics in spatially complex environ-
ments: theory and data. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London, Series B , 330, 175–190.
Karels, T.J. & Boonstra, R. (2000) Concurrent density dependence and
independence in populations of arctic ground squirrels. Nature , 408,
460–463.
Karl, B.J. & Best, H.A. (1982) Feral cats on Stewart Island: their foods,
and their effects on kakapo. New Zealand Journal of Zoology , 9,
287–294.
Karl, D. (1999) A sea of change: biogeochemical variability in the North
Paciﬁc subtropical gyre. Ecosystems , 2, 181–214.
Katz, L.A. (1998) Changing perspectives on the origin of eukaryotes.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 13, 493–498.
Kautz, G., Zimmer, M. & Topp, W. (2002) Does Porcellio scabar
(Isopoda: Oniscidea) gain from coprophagy? Soil Biology and
Biochemistry , 34, 1253–1259.
Kawano, K. (2002) Character displacement in giant rhinoceros 
beetles. American Naturalist , 159, 255–271.
Kaye, J.P. & Hart, S.C. (1997) Competition for nitrogen between 
plants and soil microorganisms. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 
12, 139–142.
Kays, S. & Harper, J.L. (1974) The regulation of plant and tiller 
density in a grass sward. Journal of Ecology , 62, 97–105.
Keane, R.M. & Crawley, M.J. (2002) Exotic plant invasions and the
enemy release hypothesis. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 17,
164–170.
Keddy, P.A. (1982) Experimental demography of the sand-duneannual, Cakile edentula , growing along an environmental gradient
in Nova Scotia. Journal of Ecology , 69, 615–630.
Keddy, P.A. & Shipley, B. (1989) Competitive heirarchies in herba-
ceous plant communities. Oikos , 54, 234–241.
Keeling, M. (1999) Spatial models of interacting populations. In:
Advanced Ecological Theory ( J. McGlade, ed.), pp. 64–99. Blackwell
Science, Oxford.
Kelly, C.A. & Dyer, R.J. (2002) Demographic consequences of
inﬂorescence-feeding insects for Liatris cylindrica , an iteroparous
perennial. Oecologia , 132, 350–360.
Kelly, D. (1994) The evolutionary ecology of mast seeding. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution , 9, 465–470.
Kelly, D., Harrison, A.L., Lee, W.G., Payton, I.J., Wilson, P.R. &
Schauber, E.M. (2000) Predator satiation and extreme mast seed-
ing in 11 species of Chionochloa (Poaceae). Oikos , 90, 477–488.
Kendall, B.E., Briggs, C.J., Murdoch, W.W. et al. (1999) Why do 
populations cycle? A synthesis of statistical and mechanistic 
modeling approaches. Ecology , 80, 1789–1805.
Kerbes, R.H., Kotanen, P.M. & Jefferies, R.L. (1990) Destruction of
wetland habitats by lesser snow geese: a keystone species on thewest coast of Hudson Bay. Journal of Applied Ecology , 27, 242–258.
Kery, M., Matthies, D. & Fischer, M. (2001) The effect of plant 
population size on the interactions between the rare plant Gentiana
cruciata and its specialized herbivore Maculinea rebeli . Journal of
Ecology , 89, 418–427.
Kessler, A. & Baldwin, I.T. (2004) Herbivore-induced plant vaccina-
tion. Part I. The orchestration of plant defences in nature and their ﬁtness consequences in the wild tobacco. Plant Journal , 38,
639–649.
Kettlewell, H.B.D. (1955) Selection experiments on industrial 
melanism in the Lepidoptera. Heredity , 9, 323–342.
Khalil, M.A.K. (1999) Non-CO
2greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Annual Review of Energy and the Environment , 24, 645–661.
Kicklighter, D.W., Bruno, M., Donges, S. et al. (1999) A ﬁrst-order
analysis of the potential role of CO2fertilization to affect the global
carbon budget: a comparison of four terrestrial biosphere models.
Tellus , 51B, 343–366.
Kie, J.G. (1999) Optimal foraging and risk of predation: effects on
behaviour and social structure in ungulates. Journal of Mammalogy ,
80, 1114–1129.
Kiers, E.T., Rousseau, R.A., West, S.A. & Denison, R.F. (2003) Host
sanctions and the legume–rhizobium mutualism. Nature , 425,
78–81.
Kiers, E.T., West, S.A. & Denison, R.F. (2002) Mediating mutualisms:
farm management practices and evolutionary changes in symbiont
co-operation. Journal of Applied Ecology , 39, 745–754.
Kimura, M. & Weiss, G.H. (1964) The stepping stone model of 
population structure and the decrease of genetic correlation withdistance. Genetics , 49, 561–576.
Kingsland, S.E. (1985) Modeling Nature . University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Kingston, T.J. & Coe, M.J. (1977) The biology of a giant dung-beetle
(Heliocorpis dilloni ) (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae). Journal of Zoology ,
181, 243–263.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 677678 REFERENCES
Kinnaird, M.F. & O’Brien, T.G. (1991) Viable populations for an 
endangered forest primate, the Tana River crested mangabey
(Cerocebus galeritus galeritus ). Conservation Biology , 5, 203–213.
Kira, T., Ogawa, H. & Shinozaki, K. (1953) Intraspeciﬁc competition
among higher plants. I. Competition–density–yield inter-relationships
in regularly dispersed populations. Journal of the Polytechnic Institute,
Osaka City University , 4(4), 1–16.
Kirchner, J.W. & Weil, A. (2000) Delayed biological recovery from
extinctions throughout the fossil record. Nature , 404, 177–180.
Kirk, J.T.O. (1994) Light and Photosynthesis in Aquatic Ecosystems .
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Kitting, C.L. (1980) Herbivore–plant interactions of individual limpets
maintaining a mixed diet of intertidal marine algae. Ecological
Monographs , 50, 527–550.
Klemola, T., Koivula, M., Korpimaki, E. & Norrdahl, K. (2000) Experi-
mental tests of predation and food hypotheses for population 
cycles of voles. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B ,
267, 352–356.
Klemow, K.M. & Raynal, D.J. (1981) Population ecology of Melilotu-
salba in a limestone quarry. Journal of Ecology , 69, 33–44.
Kling, G.W., Kipphut, G.W., Miller, M.M. & O’Brien, W.J. (2000)
Integration of lakes and streams in a landscape perspective: theimportance of material processing on spatial patterns and temporalcoherence. Freshwater Biology , 43, 477–497.
Knapp, A.K. & Smith, M.D. (2001) Variation among biomes in tem-
poral dynamics of aboveground primary production. Science , 291,
481–484.
Kneidel, K.A. (1984) Competition and disturbance in communities 
of carrion breeding Diptera. Journal of Animal Ecology , 53, 849–
865.
Knell, R.J. (1998) Generation cycles. Trends in Ecology and Evolution ,
13, 186–190.
Knell, R.J., Begon, M. & Thompson, D.J. (1998) Transmission of 
Plodia interpunctella granulosis virus does not conform to the
mass action model. Journal of Animal Ecology , 67, 592–599.
Knoch, T.R., Faeth, S.H. & Arnott, D.L. (1993) Endophytic fungi alter
foraging and dispersal by desert seed-harvesting ants. Oecologia ,
95, 470–473.
Knops, J.M.H., Bradley, K.L. & Wedin, D.A. (2002) Mechanisms 
of plant species impacts on ecosystem nitrogen cycling. Ecology
Letters , 5, 454–466.
Kodric-Brown, A. & Brown, J.M. (1993) Highly structured ﬁsh 
communities in Australian desert springs. Ecology , 74, 1847–
1855.
Koenig, W.D. & Knops, J.M.H. (1998) Scale of mast-seeding and tree-
ring growth. Nature , 396, 225–226.
Kohler, S.L. (1992) Competition and the structure of a benthic
stream community. Ecological Monographs , 62, 165–188.
Kohler, S.L. & Wiley, M.J. (1997) Pathogen outbreaks reveal large-
scale effects of competition in stream communities. Ecology , 78,
2164–2176.
Koller, D. & Roth, N. (1964) Studies on the ecological and physio-
logical signiﬁcance of amphicarpy in Gymnarrhena micrantha
(Compositae). American Journal of Botany , 51, 26–35.Korotkov, V.N., Logofet, D.O. & Loreau, M. (2001) Succession in
mixed boreal forest in Russia: Markov models and non-Markov
effects. Ecological Modelling , 142, 25–38.
Korpimaki, E., Klemola, T., Norrdahl, K. et al. (2003) Vole cycles and
predation. 
Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 18, 494–495.
Korpimaki, E., Norrdahl, K., Klemola, T., Pettersen, T. & Stenseth,
N.C. (2002) Dynamic effects of predators on cyclic voles: ﬁeld 
experimentation and model extrapolation. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Series B , 269, 991–997.
Kosola, K.R., Dickmann, D.I. & Parry, D. (2002) Carbohydrates in
individual poplar ﬁne roots: effects of root age and defoliation.
Tree Physiology , 22, 741–746.
Kozlowski, J. (1993) Measuring ﬁtness in life-history studies. Trends
in Ecology and Evolution , 7, 155–174.
Kraft, C.E. & Johnson, L.E. (2000) Regional differences in rates 
and patterns of North American inland lake invasions by zebra
mussels ( Dreissena polymorpha ). Canadian Journal of Fisheries and
Aquatic Sciences , 57, 993–1001.
Kratz, T.K., Webster, K.E., Bowser, C.J., Magnuson, J.J. & Benson, B.J.
(1997) The inﬂuence of landscape position on lakes in northernWisconsin. Freshwater Biology , 37, 209–217.
Krause, A.E., Frank, K.A., Mason, D.M., Ulanowicz, R.E. & Taylor,
W.W. (2002) Compartments revealed in food-web structure.Nature , 426, 282–285.
Krebs, C.J. (1972) Ecology . Harper & Row, New York.
Krebs, C.J. (1999) Ecological Methodology , 2nd edn. Addison-Welsey
Educational, Menlo Park, CA.
Krebs, C.J. (2003) How does rodent behaviour impact on population
dynamics? In: Rats, Mice and People: rodent biology and management
(G.R. Singleton, L.A. Hynds, C.J. Krebs & D.J. Spratt, eds), pp. 117–123. Australian Centre for International AgriculturalResearch, Canberra.
Krebs, C.J., Boonstra, R., Boutin, S. & Sinclair, A.R.E. (2001) What
drives the 10-year cycle of snowshoe hares? Bioscience , 51, 25–35.
Krebs, C.J., Boutin, S., Boonstra, R. et al. (1995) Impact of food and
predation on the snowshoe hare cycle. Science , 269, 1112–1115.
Krebs, C.J., Sinclair, A.R.E., Boonstra, R., Boutin, S., Martin, K. 
& Smith, J.N.M. (1999) Community dynamics of vertebrate herbivores: how can we untangle the web? In: Herbivores: between
plants and predators (H. Olff, V.K. Brown & R.H. Drent, eds), 
pp. 447–473. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Krebs, J.R. (1971) Territory and breeding density in the great tit, Parus
major L. Ecology , 52, 2–22.
Krebs, J.R. (1978) Optimal foraging: decision rules for predators. In:
Behavioural Ecology: an evolutionary approach ( J.R. Krebs & N.B.
Davies, eds), pp. 23–63. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Krebs, J.R. & Davies, N.B. (1993) An Introduction to Behavioural
Ecology , 3rd edn. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Krebs, J.R. & Kacelnik, A. (1991) Decision-making. In: Behavioural Eco-
logy: an evolutionary approach , 3rd edn ( J.R. Krebs & N.B. Davies,
eds), pp. 105–136. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Krebs, J.R., Erichsen, J.T., Webber, M.I. & Charnov, E.L. (1977)
Optimal prey selection in the great tit ( Parus major ). Animal
Behaviour , 25, 30–38.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 678REFERENCES 679
Krebs, J.R., Stephens, D.W. & Sutherland, W.J. (1983) Perspectives
in optimal foraging. In: Perspectives in Ornithology (A.H. Brush &
G.A. Clarke, Jr., eds), pp. 165–216. Cambridge University Press,
New York.
Kreitman, M., Shorrocks, B. & Dytham, C. (1992) Genes and ecology:
two alternative perspectives using Drosophila . In: Genes in Ecology
(R.J. Berry, T.J. Crawford & G.M. Hewitt, eds), pp. 281–312.
Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Kriticos, D.J., Sutherst, R.W., Brown, J.R., Adkins, S.W. & Maywald,
G.F. (2003) Climate change and the potential distribution of an
invasive alien plant: Acacia nilotica spp. indica in Australia. Journal
of Applied Ecology , 40, 111–124.
Kronfeld-Schor, N. & Dayan, T. (2003) Partitioning of time as an 
ecological resource. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution and
Systematics , 34, 153–181.
Kubanek, J., Whalen, K.E., Engel, S. et al. (2002) Multiple defensive
roles for triterpene glycosides from two Caribbean sponges.Oecologia , 131, 125–136.
Kullberg, C. & Ekman, J. (2000) Does predation maintain tit com-
munity diversity? Oikos , 89, 41–45.
Kunert, G. & Weisser, W.W. (2003) The interplay between density-
and trait-mediated effects in predator–prey interactions: a case studyin aphid wing polymorphism. Oecologia , 135, 304–312.
Kunin, W.E. & Gaston, K.J. (1993) The biology of rarity: patterns, causes
and consequences. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 8, 298–301.
Kuno, E. (1991) Some strange properties of the logistic equation deﬁned
with rand K: inherent defects or artifacts? Researches on Population
Ecology , 33, 33–39.
Laakso, J., Setala, H. & Palojarvi, A. (2000) Inﬂuence of decomposer
food web structure and nitrogen availability on plant growth. Plant
and Soil , 225, 153–165.
Labbé, P. (1994) Régénération après passage du cyclone Hugo en for bt
dense humide de Guadeloupe. Acta Ecologica , 15, 301–315.
Lack, D. (1947) The signiﬁcance of clutch size. Ibis, 89, 302–352.
Lack, D. (1963) Cuckoo hosts in England. (With an appendix on the
cuckoo hosts in Japan, by T. Royama.) Bird Study , 10, 185–203.
Lacy, R.C. (1993) VORTEX: a computer simulation for use in popula-
tion viability analysis. Wildlife Research , 20, 45–65.
Lambin, X. & Krebs, C.J. (1993) Inﬂuence of female relatedness 
on the demography of Townsend’s vole populations in spring.Journal of Animal Ecology , 62, 536–550.
Lambin, X. & Yoccoz, N.G. (1998) The impact of population 
kinstructure on nestling survival in Townsend’s voles, Microtus
townsendii . Journal of Animal Ecology , 67, 1–16.
Lambin, X., Aars, J. & Piertney, S.B. (2001) Dispersal, intraspeciﬁc com-
petition, kin competition and kin facilitation: a review of the empir-ical evidence. In: Dispersal ( J. Clobert, E. Danchin, A.A. Dhondt
& J.D. Nichols, eds), pp. 110–122. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Lambin, X., Krebs, C.J., Moss, R., Stenseth, N.C. & Yoccoz, N.G. (1999)
Population cycles and parasitism. Science (technical comment), 
286, 2425a.
Lambin, X., Petty, S.J. & MacKinnon, J.L. (2000) Cyclic dynamics in
ﬁeld vole populations and generalist predation. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 69, 106–118.Lande, R. (1993) Risks of population extinction from demographic and
environmental stochasticity, and random catastrophes. American
Naturalist , 142, 911–927.
Lande, R. & Barrowclough, G.F. (1987) Effective population size,
genetic variation, and their use in population management. In:
Viable Populations for Conservation (M.E. Soulé, ed.), pp. 87–123.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Landeweert, R., Hofﬂand, E., Finlay, R.D., Kuyper, T.W. & van
Breemen, N. (2001) Linking plants to rocks: ectomycorrhizal fungi
mobilize nutrients from minerals. Trends in Ecology and Evolution ,
16, 248–254.
Larcher, W. (1980) Physiological Plant Ecology , 2nd edn. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin.
Lathrop, R.C., Johnson, B.M., Johnson, T.B. et al. (2002) Stocking 
piscivores to improve ﬁshing and water clarity: a synthesis of theLake Mendota biomanipulation project. Freshwater Biology , 47,
2410–2424.
Laurance, W.F. (2001) Future shock: forecasting a grim fate for the
Earth. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 16, 531–533.
Law, B.E., Thornton, P.E., Irvine, J., Anthoni, P.M. & van Tuyl, S.
(2001) Carbon storage and ﬂuxes in ponderosa pine forests at dif-ferent developmental stages. Global Climate Change , 7, 755–777.
Law, R. & Watkinson, A.R. (1987) Response-surface analysis of 
two-species competition: an experiment on Phleum arenarium and
Vulpia fasciculata. Journal of Ecology , 75, 871–886.
Law, R. & Watkinson, A.R. (1989) Competition. In: Ecological Concepts
( J.M. Cherrett, ed.), pp. 243–284. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications,Oxford.
Lawler, I.R., Foley, W.J. & Eschler, B.M. (2000) Foliar concentration
of a single toxin creates habitat patchiness for a marsupial folivore.Ecology , 81, 1327–1338.
Lawler, S.P. Morin, P.J. (1993) Temporal overlap, competition, and
priority effects in larval anurans. Ecology , 74, 174–182.
Lawlor, L.R. (1978) A comment on randomly constructed ecosystem
models. American Naturalist , 112, 445–447.
Lawlor, L.R. (1980) Structure and stability in natural and randomly
constructed competitive communities. American Naturalist , 116,
394–408.
Lawton, J.H. (1984) Non-competitive populations, non-convergent 
communities, and vacant niches: the herbivores of bracken. In: Ecological Communities Conceptual Issues and the Evidence
(D.R. Strong, D. Simberloff, L.G. Abele & A.B. Thistle, eds), pp. 67–100. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Lawton, J.H. (1989) Food webs. In: Ecological Concepts ( J.M. Cherrett,
ed.), pp. 43–78. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Lawton, J.H. & May, R.M. (1984) The birds of Selborne. Nature , 306,
732–733.
Lawton, J.H. & Woodroffe, G.L. (1991) Habitat and the distribution
of water voles: why are there gaps in a species’ range? Journal of
Animal Ecology , 60, 79–91.
Le Cren, E.D. (1973) Some examples of the mechanisms that control
the population dynamics of salmonid ﬁsh. In: The Mathematical
Theory of the Dynamics of Biological Populations (M.S. Bartlett & 
R.W. Hiorns, eds), pp. 125–135. Academic Press, London.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 679680 REFERENCES
Lee, C.-S., You, Y.-H. & Robinson, G.R. (2002) Secondary succession
and natural habitat restoration in abandoned rice ﬁelds of central
Korea. Restoration Ecology , 10, 306–314.
Lee, W.G. & Jamieson, I.G. (eds) (2001) The Takahe: ﬁfty years of 
conservation management and research . University of Otago Press,
Dunedin, New Zealand.
Leigh, E. (1975) Population ﬂuctuations and community structure.
In: Unifying Concepts in Ecology (W.H. van Dobben & R.H. Lowe–
McConnell, eds), pp. 67–88. Junk, The Hague.
Leirs, H., Stenseth, N.C., Nichols, J.D., Hines, J.E., Verhagen, R. &
Verheyen, W. (1997) Stochastic seasonality and non-linear density
dependent factors regulate population size in an African rodent.Nature , 389, 176–180.
Lekve, K., Ottersen, G., Stenseth, N.C. & Gjøsæter, J. (2002) Length
dynamics in juvenile coastal Skagerrak cod: effects of biotic andabiotic processes. Ecology , 86, 1676–1688.
Lennartsson, T., Nilsson, P. & Tuomi, J. (1998) Induction of over-
compensation in the ﬁeld gentian, Gentianella campestris . Ecology ,
79, 1061–1072.
Lessells, C.M. (1991) The evolution of life histories. In: Behavioural
Ecology , 3rd edn ( J.R. Krebs & N.B. Davies, eds), pp. 32–68.
Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Letourneau, D.K. & Dyer, L.A. (1998a) Density patterns of Piper 
ant-plants and associated arthropods: top-predator trophic cascadesin a terrestrial system? Biotropica , 30, 162–169.
Letourneau, D.K. & Dyer, L.A. (1998b) Experimental test in a low-
land tropical forest shows top-down effects through four trophiclevels. Ecology , 79, 1678–1687.
Leverich W.J. & Levin, D.A. (1979) Age-speciﬁc survivorship and repro-
duction in Phlox drummondii. American Naturalist , 113, 881–903.
Levey, D.J. (1988) Tropical wet forest treefall gaps and distributions
of understorey birds and plants. Ecology , 69, 1076–1089.
Levins, R. (1968) Evolution in Changing Environments . Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton, NJ.
Levins, R. (1969) Some demographic and genetic consequences of 
environmental heterogeneity for biological control. Bulletin of the
Entomological Society of America , 15, 237–240.
Levins, R. (1970) Extinction. In: Lectures on Mathematical Analysis 
of Biological Phenomena , pp. 123–138. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, Vol. 231.
Lewontin, R.C. & Levins, R. (1989) On the characterization of density
and resource availability. American Naturalist , 134, 513–524.
Lichter, J. (2000) Colonization constraints during primary succes-
sion on coastal Lake Michigan sand dunes. Journal of Ecology , 88,
825–839.
Lidicker, W.Z. Jr. (1975) The role of dispersal in the demography of
small mammal populations. In: Small Mammals: their productivity and
population dynamics (K. Petruscwicz, F.B. Golley & L. Ryszkowski,
eds), pp. 103–128. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Likens, G.E. (1992) The Ecosystem Approach: its use and abuse. Excellence
in Ecology , Book 3. Ecology Institute, Oldendorf-Luhe, Germany.
Likens, G.E. & Bormann, F.G. (1975) An experimental approach to
New England landscapes. In: Coupling of Land and Water Systems
(A.D. Hasler, ed.), pp. 7–30. Springer-Verlag, New York.Likens, G.E. Bormann, F.H., Pierce, R.S. & Fisher, D.W. (1971)
Nutrient–hydrologic cycle interaction in small forested watershed
ecosystems. In: Productivity of Forest Ecosystems (P. Duvogneaud,
ed.), pp. 553–563. UNESCO, Paris.
Lillebo, A.I., Flindt, M.R., Pardal, M.A. & Marques, J.C. (1999) 
The effect of macrofauna, meiofauna and microfauna on the
degradation of Spartina maritima detritus from a salt marsh area.
Acta Oecologica , 20, 249–258.
Lima, M., Keymer, J.E. & Jaksic, F.M. (1999) El Niño–Southern
Oscillation-driven rainfall variability and delayed density depend-
ence cause rodent outbreaks in western South America: linkingdemography and population dynamics. American Naturalist
, 153,
476–491.
Lin, B., Sakoda, A., Shibasaki, R., Goto, N. & Suzuki, M. (2000)
Modelling a global biogeochemical nitrogen cycle in terrestrial
ecosystems. Ecological Modelling , 135, 89–110.
Lindemann, R.L. (1942) The trophic–dynamic aspect of ecology.
Ecology , 23, 399–418.
Lochmiller, R.L. & Derenberg, C. (2000) Trade-offs in evolutionary
immunology: just what is the cost of immunity? Oikos , 88, 87–98.
Lofgren, A. & Jerling, L. (2002) Species richness, extinction and
immigration rates of vascular plants on islands in the Stockholm
Archipelago, Sweden, during a century of ceasing management.Folia Geobotanica , 37, 297–308.
Loik, M.E. & Nobel, P.S. (1993) Freezing tolerance and water 
relations of Opuntia fragilis from Canada and the United States.
Ecology , 74, 1722–1732.
Loladze, I. (2002) Rising atmospheric CO
2and human nutrition:
toward globally imbalanced plant stoichiometry? Trends in Ecology
and Evolution , 17, 457–461.
Long, S.P., Humphries, S. & Falkowski, P.G. (1994) Photoinhibition
of photosynthesis in nature. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and
Plant Molecular Biology , 45, 633–662.
Lonsdale, W.M. (1990) The self-thinning rule: dead or alive? Ecology ,
71, 1373–1388.
Lonsdale, W.M. & Watkinson, A.R. (1983) Light and self-thinning.
New Phytologist , 90, 431–435.
Loreau, M. (2000) Are communities saturated? On the relationship
between α, βand γdiversity. Ecology Letters , 3, 73–76.
Loreau, M., Naeem, S., Inchausti, P. et al. (2001) Biodiversity and eco-
system functioning: current knowledge and future challenges.Science , 294, 804–808.
Losos, E. (1993) The future of the US Endangered Species Act.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 8, 332–336.
Losos, J.B. (1992) The evolution of convergent structure in Caribbean
Anolis communities. Systematic Biology , 41, 403–420.
Losos, J.B., Jackman, T.R., Larson, A., de Queiroz, K. & Rodriguez-
Schettino, L. (1998) Contingency and determinism in replicatedadaptive radiations of island lizards. Science , 279, 2115–2118.
Lotka, A.J. (1932) The growth of mixed populations: two species 
competing for a common food supply. Journal of the Washington
Academy of Sciences , 22, 461–469.
Loucks, C.J., Zhi, L., Dinerstein, E., Dajun, W., Dali, F. & Hao, W.
(2003) The giant pandas of the Qinling Mountains, China: a 
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 680REFERENCES 681
case study in designing conservation landscapes for elevational
migrants. Conservation Biology , 17, 558–565.
Louda, S.M. (1982) Distribution ecology: variation in plant recruitment
over a gradient in relation to insect seed predation. Ecological
Monographs , 52, 25–41.
Louda, S.M. & Rodman, J.E. (1996) Insect herbivory as a major 
factor in the shade distribution of a native crucifer ( Cardamine 
cordifolia A. Gray, bittercress). Journal of Ecology , 84, 229–237.
Louda, S.M., Arnett, A.E., Rand, T.A. & Russell, F.L. (2003a) Invasive-
ness of some biological control insects and adequacy of their 
ecological risk assessment and regulation. Conservation Biology , 
17, 73–82.
Louda, S.M., Kendall, D., Connor, J. et al. (1997) Ecological effects of
an insect introduced for the biological control of weeds. Science ,
277, 1088–1990.
Louda, S.M., Pemberton, R.W., Johnson, M.T. & Follett, P.A.
(2003b) Non-target effects – the Achilles’ heel of biological con-trol? Retrospective analyses to reduce risk associated with biocontrolintroductions. Annual Review of Entomology , 48, 365–396.
Lovett Doust, J., Schmidt, M. & Lovett Doust, L. (1994) Biological
assessment of aquatic pollution: a review, with emphasis on plantsas biomonitors. Biological Reviews , 69, 147–186.
Lovett Doust, L. & Lovett Doust, J. (1982) The battle strategies of
plants. New Scientist , 95, 81–84.
Lowe, V.P.W. (1969) Population dynamics of the red deer ( Cervus 
elaphus L.) on Rhum. Journal of Animal Ecology , 38, 425–457.
Lubchenco, J. (1978) Plant species diversity in a marine intertidal 
community: importance of herbivore food preference and algalcompetitive abilities. American Naturalist , 112, 23–39.
Lubchenco, J., Olson, A.M., Brubaker, L.B. et al. (1991) The sustain-
able biosphere initiative: an ecological research agenda. Ecology ,
72, 371–412.
Luckmann, W.H. & Decker, G.C. (1960) A 5-year report on observa-
tions in the Japanese beetle control area of Sheldon, Illinois. Journal
of Economic Entomology , 53, 821–827.
Lui, Y.B., Tabashnik, B.E., Dennehy, T.J. et al. (2001) Effects of 
Bt cotton and Cry1Ac toxin on survival and development of pink bollworm (Lepidoptera : Gelechiidae). Journal of Economic
Entomology , 94, 1237–1242.
Lukens, R.J. & Mullany, R. (1972) The inﬂuence of shade and wet
on southern corn blight. Plant Disease Reporter , 56, 203–206.
Luo, T., Li, W. & Zhu, H. (2002) Estimated biomass and produc-
tivity of natural vegetation on the Tibetan Plateau. Ecological
Applications ,12, 980–997.
Lussenhop, J. (1992) Mechanisms of microarthropod–microbial inter-
actions in soil. Advances in Ecological Research , 23, 1–33.
MacArthur, J.W. (1975) Environmental ﬂuctuations and species
diversity. In: Ecology and Evolution of Communities (M.L. Cody &
J.M. Diamond, eds), pp. 74–80. Belknap, Cambridge, MA.
MacArthur, R.H. (1955) Fluctuations of animal populations and a 
measure of community stability. Ecology , 36, 533–536.
MacArthur, R.H. (1962) Some generalized theorems of natural 
selection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the USA ,
48, 1893–1897.MacArthur, R.H. (1972) Geographical Ecology . Harper & Row, New York.
MacArthur, R.H. & Levins, R. (1964) Competition, habitat selection
and character displacement in a patchy environment. 
Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences , 51, 1207–1210.
MacArthur, R.H. & Levins, R. (1967) The limiting simularity, con-
vergence and divergence of coexisting species. American Naturalist ,
101, 377–385.
MacArthur, R.H. & Pianka, E.R. (1966) On optimal use of a patchy
environment. American Naturalist , 100, 603–609.
MacArthur, R.H. & Wilson, E.O. (1967) The Theory of Island Bio-
geography . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
McCallum, H., Barlow, N. & Hone, J. (2001) How should pathogen
transmission be modelled? Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 16,
295–300.
McCann, K. & Hastings, A. (1997) Re-evaluating the omnivory–
stability relationship in food webs. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London, Series B , 264, 1249–1254.
McCune, D.C. & Boyce, R.L. (1992) Precipitation and the transfer of
water, nutrients and pollutants in tree canopies. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution , 7, 4–7.
MacDonald, A.S., Araujo, M.I. & Pearce, E.J. (2002) Immunology and
parasitic helminth infections. Infection and Immunity , 70, 427–433.
Mace, G.M. (1994) An investigation into methods for categorizing 
the conservation status of species. In: Large-Scale Ecology and
Conservation Biology (P.J. Edwards, R.M. May & N.R. Webb, eds),
pp. 293–312. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Mace, G.M. & Lande, R. (1991) Assessing extinction threats: toward
a reevaluation of IUCN threatened species categories. Conserva-
tion Biology , 5, 148–157.
McGrady-Steed, J., Harris, P.M. & Morin, P.J. (1997) Biodiversity 
regulates ecosystem predictability. Nature , 390, 162–165.
Mack, R.N., Simberloff, D., Lonsdale, W.M., Evans, H., Clout, M. &
Bazzaz, F.A. (2000) Biotic invasions: causes, epidemiology, globalconsequences and control. Ecological Applications , 10, 689–710.
McIntosh, A.R. & Townsend, C.R. (1994) Interpopulation variation
in mayﬂy anti-predator tactics: differential effects of contrastingﬁsh predators. Ecology , 75, 2078–2090.
McKane, R.B., Johnson, L.C., Shaver, G.R. et al. (2002) Resource-based
niches provide a basis for plant species diversity and dominancein arctic tundra. Nature , 415, 68–71.
McKay, J.K., Bishop, J.G., Lin, J.-Z., Richards, J.H., Sala, A. &
Mitchell-Olds, T. (2001) Local adaptation across a climatic gradient despite small effective population size in the rare sapphirerockcress. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 268,
1715–1721.
McKenzie, N.L. & Rolfe, J.K. (1986) Structure of bat guilds in the
Kimberley mangroves, Australia. Journal of Animal Ecology , 55,
401–420.
McKey, D. (1979) The distribution of secondary compounds within
plants. In: Herbivores: their interaction with secondary plant metabolites
(G.A. Rosenthal & D.H. Janzen, eds), pp. 56–134. Academic Press,New York.
MacKinnon, K. (1998) Sustainable use as a conservation tool in the
forests of South-East Asia. In: Conservation of Biological Resources
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 681682 REFERENCES
(E.J. Milner-Gulland & R. Mace, eds), pp. 174–192. Blackwell
Science, Oxford.
McKone, M.J., Kelly, D. & Lee, W.G. (1998) Effect of climate change
on mast-seeding species: frequency of mass ﬂowering and escape
from specialist insect seed predators. Global Change Biology , 4,
591–596.
MacLachlan, A.J., Pearce, L.J. & Smith, J.A. (1979) Feeding inter-
actions and cycling of peat in a bog lake. Journal of Animal Ecology ,
48, 851–861.
MacLulick, D.A. (1937) Fluctuations in numbers of the varying hare
(Lepus americanus ). University of Toronto Studies, Biology Series , 43,
1–136.
McMahon, T. (1973) Size and shape in biology. Science , 179, 1201–
1204.
McNaughton, S.J. (1975) r- and k-selection in Typha. American
Naturalist , 109, 251–261.
McNaughton, S.J. (1977) Diversity and stability of ecological com-
munities: a comment on the role of empiricism in ecology. American
Naturalist , 111, 515–525.
McNaughton, S.J. (1978) Stability and diversity of ecological com-
munities. Nature , 274, 251–253.
Maguire, L.A., Seal, U.S. & Brussard, P.F. (1987) Managing critic-
ally endangered species: the Sumatran rhino as a case study. In:
Viable Populations for Conservation (M.E. Soulé, ed.), pp. 141–158.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Mahaman, B.D., Passam, H.C., Sideridis, A.B. & Yialouris, C.P. (2003)
DIARES-IPM: a diagnostic advisory rule-based expert system for integrated pest management in solanaceous crop systems.Agricultural Systems , 76, 1119–1135.
Malmqvist, B., Wotton, R.S. & Zhang, Y. (2001) Suspension feeders
transform massive amounts of seston in large northern rivers. Oikos , 92, 35–43.
Marchetti, M.P. & Moyle, P.B. (2001) Effects of ﬂow regime on ﬁsh
assemblages in a regulated California stream. Ecological Applications ,
11, 530–539.
Marcos, G.M., & Lancho, J.F.G. (2002) Atmospheric deposition in 
oligotrophic Quercus pyrenaica forests: implications for forest
nutrition. Forest Ecology and Management , 171, 17–29.
Margules, C.R. & Pressey, R.L. (2000) Systematic conservation 
planning. Nature , 405, 243–253.
Margulis, L. (1975) Symbiotic theory of the origin of eukaryotic
organelles. In: Symbiosis (D.H. Jennings & D.L. Lee, eds), pp. 21–38.
Symposium 29, Society for Experimental Biology. CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Margulis, L. (1996) Archaeal–eubacterial mergers in the origin of
Eukarya: phylogenetic classiﬁcation of life. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA , 93, 1071–1076.
Maron, J.L., Combs, J.K. & Louda, S.M. (2002) Convergent demo-
graphic effects of insect attack on related thistles in coastal vs continental dunes. Ecology , 83, 3382–3392.
Marsden-Smedley, J.B. & Kirkpatrick, J.B. (2000) Fire management in
Tasmania’s Wilderness World Heritage Area: ecosystem restora-tion using indigenous-style ﬁre regimes. Ecological Management and
Restoration , 1, 195–203.Marshall, I.D. & Douglas, G.W. (1961) Studies in the epidemiology
of infectious myxomatosis of rabbits. VIII. Further observations on
changes in the innate resistance of Australian wild rabbits exposed
to myxomatosis. Journal of Hygiene , 59, 117–122.
Martin, M.M. (1991) The evolution of cellulose digestion in insects.
In: The Evolutionary Interaction of Animals and Plant (W.G. Chaloner,
J.L. Harper & J.H. Lawton, eds), pp. 105–112. The Royal Society,
London; also in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, Series B , 333, 281–288.
Martin, P.R. & Martin, T.E. (2001) Ecological and ﬁtness consequences
of species coexistence: a removal experiment with wood warblers.
Ecology , 82, 189–206.
Martin, P.S. (1984) Prehistoric overkill: the global model. In: Quatern-
ary Extinctions: a prehistoric revolution (P.S. Martin & R.G. Klein,
eds), pp. 354–403. University of Arizona Press, Tuscon, AZ.
Martinez, N.D. (1991) Artefacts or attributes? Effects of resolution on
the Little Rock Lake food web. Ecological Monographs , 61, 367–392.
Martinez, N.D. (1993) Effects of resolution on food web structure.
Oikos , 66, 403–412.
Marzusch, K. (1952) Untersuchungen über di Temperaturabhäng-
igkeit von Lebensprozessen bei Insekten unter besonderer
Berücksichtigung winter-schlantender Kartoffelkäfer. Zeitschrift
für vergleicherde Physiologie , 34, 75–92.
Matter, S.F., Hanski, I. & Gyllenberg, M. (2002) A test of the meta-
population model of the species–area relationship. Journal of
Biogeography , 29, 977–983.
Matthaei, C.D. & Townsend, C.R. (2000) Long-term effects of local
disturbance history on mobile stream invertebrates. Oecologia , 125,
119–126.
Matthaei, C.D., Peacock, K.A. & Townsend, C.R. (1999) Scour and
ﬁll patterns in a New Zealand stream and potential implications
for invertebrate refugia. Freshwater Biology , 42, 41–58.
Matthiopoulos, J., Moss, R., Mougeot, F., Lambin, X. & Redpath, S.M.
(2003) Territorial behaviour and population dynamics in redgrouse Lagopus lagopus scoticus . II. Population models. Journal of
Animal Ecology , 72, 1083–1096.
May, R.M. (1972) Will a large complex system be stable? Nature , 238,
413–414.
May, R.M. (1973) On relationships among various types of popula-
tion models. American Naturalist , 107, 46–57.
May, R.M. (1975a) Biological populations obeying difference equations:
stable points, stable cycles and chaos. Journal of Theoretical Biology ,
49, 511–524.
May, R.M. (1975b) Patterns of species abundance and diversity. In:
Ecology and Evolution of Communities (M.L. Cody & J.M. Diamond,
eds), pp. 81–120. Belknap, Cambridge, MA.
May, R.M. (1976) Estimating r: a pedagogical note. American Naturalist ,
110, 496–499.
May, R.M. (1978) Host–parasitoid systems in patchy environ-
ments: a phenomenological model. Journal of Animal Ecology , 47,
833–843.
May, R.M. (1981) Models for two interacting populations. In:
Theoretical Ecology: principles and applications , 2nd edn (R.M. May,
ed.), pp. 78–104. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 682REFERENCES 683
May, R.M. (1990) How many species? Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, Series B , 330, 293–304.
May, R.M. & Anderson, R.M. (1979) Population biology of infectious
diseases. Nature , 280, 455–461.
May, R.M. & Anderson, R.M. (1983) Epidemiology and genetics in
the coevolution of parasites and hosts. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London, Series B , 219, 281–313.
Mayer, G.C. & Chipley, R.M. (1992) Turnover in the avifauna of 
Guana Island, British Virgin Islands. Journal of Animal Ecology , 61,
561–566.
Maynard Smith, J. (1972) On Evolution . Edinburgh University Press,
Edinburgh.
Maynard Smith, J. & Slatkin, M. (1973) The stability of predator–
prey systems. Ecology , 54, 384–391.
Mehner, T., Benndorf, J., Kasprzak, P. & Koschel, R. (2002)
Biomanipulation of lake ecosystems: successful applications and
expanding complexity in the underlying science. Freshwater Biology ,
47, 2453–2465.
Meijer, M.-L., de Boois, I., Scheffer, M., Portielje, R. & Hosper, H.
(1999) Biomanipulation in shallow lakes in the Netherlands: anevaluation of 18 case studies. Hydrobiologia , 408/9, 13–30.
Menalled, F.D., Gross, K.L. & Hammond, M. (2001) Weed above-
ground and seedbank community responses to agricultural management systems. Ecological Applications , 11, 1586–1601.
Menge, B.A. & Sutherland, J.P. (1976) Species diversity gradients: 
synthesis of the roles of predation, competition, and temporal heterogeneity. American Naturalist , 110, 351–369.
Menge, B.A. & Sutherland, J.P. (1987) Community regulation: 
variation in disturbance, competition, and predation in relationto environmental stress and recruitment. American Naturalist , 130,
730–757.
Menge, B.A., Lubchenco, J., Gaines, S.D. & Ashkenas, L.R. (1986) A
test of the Menge–Sutherland model of community organizationin a tropical rocky intertidal food web. Oecologia , 71, 75–89.
Menges, E.S. (2000) Population viability analyses in plants: chal-
lenges and opportunities. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 15,
51–56.
Menges, E.S. & Dolan, R.W. (1998) Demographic viability of popula-
tions of Silene regia in midwestern prairies: relationships with ﬁre
management, genetic variation, geographic location, populationsize and isolation. Journal of Ecology , 86, 63–78.
Merryweather, J.W. & Fitter, A.H. (1995) Phosphorus and carbon 
budgets: mycorrhizal contribution in Hyacinthoides non-scripta
(L.) Chouard ex Rothm. under natural conditions. New Phytologist ,
129, 619–627.
Metcalf, R.L. (1982) Insecticides in pest management. In: Introduction
to Insect Pest Management , 2nd edn (R.L. Metcalf & W.L. Luckmann,
eds), pp. 217–277. Wiley, New York.
Meyer, A. (1993) Phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary processes
in East African cichlid ﬁshes. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 8,
279–284.
Micheli, F., Peterson, C.H., Mullineaux, L.S. et al. (2002) Predation
structures communities at deep-sea hydrothermal vents. Ecological
Monographs , 72, 365–382.Mikola, J., Salonen, V. & Setala, H. (2002) Studying the effects of 
plant species richness on ecosystem functioning: does the choice
of experimental design matter? Oecologia , 133, 594–598.
Milinski, M. & Parker, G.A. (1991) Competition for resources. In:
Behavioural Ecology: an evolutionary approach , 3rd edn ( J.R. Krebs
& N.B. Davies, eds), pp. 137–168. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications,
Oxford.
Miller, G.T. Jr. (1988) Environmental Science , 2nd edn. Wadsworth,
Belmont.
Milliman, J.D. (1997) Blessed dams or damned dams? 
Nature , 386,
325–326.
Mills, J.A., Lavers, R.B. & Lee, W.G. (1984) The takahe – a relict of
the Pleistocene grassland avifauna of New Zealand. New Zealand
Journal of Ecology , 7, 57–70.
Mills, L.S., Soule, M.E. & Doak, D.F. (1993) The keystone-
species concept in ecology and conservation. Bioscience , 43,
219–224.
Milne, L.J. & Milne, M. (1976) The social behaviour of burying 
beetles. Scientiﬁc American , August, 84–89.
Milner-Gulland, E.J. & Mace, R. (1998) Conservation of Biological
Resources . Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Minorsky, P.V. (1985) An heuristic hypothesis of chilling injury in 
plants: a role for calcium as the primary physiological transducer
of injury. Plant Cell and Environment , 8, 75–94.
Mistri, M. (2003) Foraging behaviour and mutual interference in 
the Mediterranean shore crab, Carcinus aestuarii , preying upon 
the immigrant mussel Musculista senhousia . Estuarine, Coastal and
Shelf Science , 56, 155–159.
Mittelbach, G.G., Steiner, C.F., Scheiner, S.M. et al. (2001) What is the
observed relationship between species richness and productivity?Ecology , 82, 2381–2396.
Moilanen, A., Smith, A.T. & Hanski, I. (1998) Long-term dynamics
in a metapopulation of the American pika. American Naturalist , 
152, 530–542.
Montagnes, D.J.S., Kimmance, S.A. & Atkinson, D. (2003) Using 
Q
10, can growth rates increase linearly with temperature? Aquatic
Microbial Ecology , 32, 307–313.
Montague, J.R., Mangan, R.L. & Starmer, W.T. (1981) Reproductive
allocation in the Hawaiian Drosophilidae: egg size and number.
American Naturalist , 118, 865–871.
Mooney, H.A. & Gulmon, S.L. (1979) Enironmental and evolu-
tionary constraints on the photosynthetic pathways of higherplants. In: Topics in Plant Population Biology (O.T. Solbrig, S. Jain,
G.B. Johnson & P.H. Raven, eds), pp. 316–337. Columbia Uni-
versity Press, New York.
Mooney, H.A., Vitousek, P.M. & Matson, P.A. (1987) Exchange of
materials between terrestrial ecosystems and the atmosphere,Science , 238, 926–932.
Moran, N.A., Munson, M.A., Baumann, P. & Ishikawa, H. (1993) 
A molecular clock in endosymbiotic bacteria is calibrated usingthe insect hosts. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B ,
253, 167–171.
Moreau, R.E. (1952) The place of Africa in the palaearctic migration
system. Journal of Animal Ecology , 21, 250–271.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 683684 REFERENCES
Morris, C.E. (2002) Self-thinning lines differ with fertility level.
Ecological Research , 17, 17–28.
Morris, D.W. & Davidson, D.L. (2000) Optimally foraging mice match
patch use with habitat differences in ﬁtness. Ecology , 81, 2061–2066.
Morris, R.F. (1959) Single-factor analysis in population dynamics.
Ecology , 40, 580–588.
Morris, R.J., Lewis, O.T. & Godfray, C.J. (2004) Experimental evid-
ence for apparent competition in a tropical forest food web. Nature ,
428, 310–313.
Morrison, G. & Strong, D.R. Jr. (1981) Spatial variations in egg dens-
ity and the intensity of parasitism in a neotropical chrysomelid
(Cephaloleia consanguinea ). Ecological Entomology , 6, 55–61.
Morrow, P.A. & Olfelt, J.P. (2003) Phoenix clones: recovery after long-
term defoliation-induced dormancy. Ecology Letters , 6, 119 –125.
Mosier, A.R., Bleken, M.A., Chaiwanakupt, P. et al. (2002) Policy 
implications of human-accelerated nitrogen cycling. Biogeochemistry ,
57/58, 477–516.
Moss, B. (1989) Ecology of Fresh Waters: man and medium , 2nd edn.
Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Moss, B., Balls, H., Booker, I., Manson, K. & Timms, M. (1988)
Problems in the construction of a nutrient budget for the RiverBure and its Broads (Norfolk) prior to its restoration from eutro-phication. In: Algae and the Aquatic Environment (F.E. Round, ed.),
pp. 326–352. Biopress, Bristol, UK.
Moss, G.D. (1971) The nature of the immune response of the mouse
to the bile duct cestode, Hymenolepis microstoma . Parasitology , 62,
285–294.
Moss, R. & Watson, A. (2001) Population cycles in birds of the
grouse family (Tetraonidae). Advances in Ecological Research , 32,
53–111.
Mothershead, K. & Marquis, R.J. (2000) Fitness impacts of herbivory
through indirect effects on plant-pollinator interactions in Oenothera
macrocarpa . Ecology , 81, 30–40.
Mougeot, F., Redpath, S.M., Leckie, F. & Hudson, P.J. (2003) The
effect of aggressiveness on the population dynamics of a territorialbird. Nature , 421, 737–739.
Mougeot, F., Redpath, S.M., Moss, R., Matthiopoulos, J. & Hudson,
P.J. (2003) Territorial behaviour and population dynamics in redgrouse, Lagopus lagopus scoticus . I. Population experiments. Journal
of Animal Ecology , 72, 1073–1082.
Moulton, M.P. & Pimm, S.L. (1986) The extent of competition in shap-
ing an introduced avifauna. In: Community Ecology ( J. Diamond
& T.J. Case, eds), pp. 80–97. Harper & Row, New York.
Mouritsen, K.N. (2002) The parasite-induced surfacing behaviour in
the cockle Austrovenus stutchburyi : a test of an alternative hypo-
thesis and identiﬁcation of potential mechanisms. Parasitology , 
124, 521–528.
Mouritsen, K.N. & Jensen, K.T. (1997) Parasite transmission between
soft-bottom invertebrates: temperature mediated infection ratesand mortality in Corophium volutator . Marine Ecology Progress Series ,
151, 123–134.
Mouritsen, K.N. & Poulin, R. (2002) Parasitism, community struc-
ture and biodiversity in intertidal ecosystems. Parasitology , 124,
S101–S117.Mouritsen, K.N. & Poulin, R. (2005) Parasite boosts biodiversity and
changes animal community structure by trait-mediated indir-
ect effects. Oikos , 108, 344–350.
Mouritsen, K.N., Jensen, T. & Jensen K.T. (1997) Parasites on an 
intertidal Corophium -bed: factors determining the phenology of
microphallid trematodes in the intermediate host population of the mud-snail Hydrobia ulvae and the amphipod Corophium
volutator . Hydrobiologia , 355, 61–70.
Mouritsen, K.N., Mouritsen, L.T. & Jensen, K.T. (1998) Change of
topography and sediment characteristics on an intertidal mud-ﬂat
following mass-mortality of the amphipod Corophium volutator .
Journal of Marine Biology Association of the United Kingdom , 78,
1167–1180.
Müller, H.J. (1970) Food distribution, searching success and predator–
prey models. In: The Mathematical Theory of the Dynamics of Biological
Populations (R.W. Hiorns, ed.), pp. 87–101. Academic Press, London.
Muller, M.M., Varama, M., Heinonen, J. & Hallaksela, A. (2002) Inﬂu-
ence of insects on the diversity of fungi in decaying spruce wood
in managed and natural forests. Forest Ecology and Management , 166,
165–181.
Murdie, G. & Hassell, M.P. (1973) Food distribution, searching 
success and predator–prey models. In: The Mathematical Theory 
of the Dynamics of Biological Populations (R.W. Hiorns, ed.), 
pp. 87–101. Academic Press, London.
Murdoch, W.W. (1966) Community structure, population control and
competition – a critique. American Naturalist , 100, 219–226.
Murdoch, W.W. & Briggs, C.J. (1996) Theory for biological control:
recent developments. Ecology , 77, 2001–2013.
Murdoch, W.W. & Stewart-Oaten, A. (1975) Predation and popula-
tion stability. Advances in Ecological Research , 9, 1–131.
Murdoch, W.W. & Stewart-Oaten, A. (1989) Aggregation by para-
sitoids and predators: effects on equilibrium and stability. American
Naturalist , 134, 288–310.
Murdoch, W.W., Avery, S. & Smith, M.E.B. (1975) Switching in 
predatory ﬁsh. Ecology , 56, 1094–1105.
Murdoch, W.W., Briggs, C.J., Nisbet, R.M., Gurney, W.S.C. &
Stewart-Oaten, A. (1992) Aggregation and stability in meta-population models. American Naturalist , 140, 41–58.
Murdoch, W.W., Luck, R.F., Swarbrick, S.L., Walde, S., Yu, D.S. 
& Reeve, J.D. (1995) Regulation of an insect population under biological control. Ecology , 76, 206–217.
Murton, R.K., Isaacson, A.J. & Westwood, N.J. (1966) The relation-
ships between wood pigeons and their clover food supply and the mechanism of population control. Journal of Applied Ecology ,
3, 55–93.
Murton, R.K., Westwood, N.J. & Isaacson, A.J. (1974) A study of wood-
pigeon shooting: the exploitation of a natural animal population.Journal of Applied Ecology , 11, 61–81.
Muscatine, L. & Pool, R.R. (1979) Regulation of numbers of intra-
cellular algae. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B ,
204, 115–139.
Mwendera, E.J., Saleem, M.A.M & Woldu, Z. (1997) Vegetation
response to cattle grazing in the Ethiopian Highlands. Agriculture,
Ecosystems and Environment , 64, 43–51.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 684REFERENCES 685
Myers, J.H. (1988) Can a general hypothesis explain population
cycles of forest Lepidoptera. Advances in Ecological Research , 18,
179–242.
Myers, J.H., Mittermeier, R.A., Mittermeier, C.G., da Fonseca, G.A.B.
& Kent, J. (2000) Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities.
Nature , 403, 853–858.
Myers, R.A. (2001) Stock and recruitment: generalizations about
maximum reproductive rate, density dependence, and variability
using meta-analytic approaches. ICES Journal of Marine Science , 
58, 937–951.
Myers, R.A., Barrowman, N.J., Hutchings, S.A. & Rosenberg, A.A.
(1995) Population dynamics of exploited ﬁsh stocks at low population levels. Science , 269, 1106–1108.
Nalepa, C.A., Bignell, D.E. & Bandi, C. (2001) Detritivory, copro-
phagy, and the evolution of digestive mutualisms in Dictyoptera.Insectes Sociaux , 48, 194–201.
National Research Council (1990) Alternative Agriculture . National
Academy of Sciences, Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Nedergaard, J. & Cannon, B. (1990) Mammalian hibernation. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 326,
669–686; also in Life at Low Temperatures (R.M. Laws & F. Franks,
eds), pp. 153–170. The Royal Society, London.
Neff, J.C., Holland, E.A., Dentener, F.J., McDowell, W.H. & Russell,
K.M. (2002) The origin, composition and rates of organic nitrogendeposition: a missing piece of the nitrogen cycle? Biogeochemistry ,
57/58, 99–136.
NERC (1990) Our Changing Environment . Natural Environment
Research Council, London. (NERC acknowledges the signiﬁcantcontribution of Fred Pearce to the document.)
Neubert, M.G. & Caswell, H. (2000) Demography and dispersal: 
calculation and sensitivity analysis of invasion speed for struc-tured populations. Ecology , 81, 1613–1628.
Neumann, R.L. (1967) Metabolism in the Eastern chipmunk ( Tamias
striatus ) and the Southern ﬂying squirrel ( Glaucomys volans ) 
during the winter and summer. In: Mammalian Hibernation III
(K.C. Fisher, A.R. Dawe, C.P. Lyman, E. Schönbaum & F.E. South,eds), pp. 64–74. Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh and London.
Newsham, K.K., Fitter, A.H. & Watkinson, A.R. (1994) Root patho-
genic and arbuscular mycorrhizal mycorrhizal fungi determinefecundity of asymptomatic plants in the ﬁeld. Journal of Ecology ,
82, 805–814.
Newsham, K.K., Fitter, A.H. & Watkinson, A.R. (1995) Multi-
functionality and biodiversity in arbuscular mycorrhizas. Trends
in Ecology and Evolution , 10, 407–411.
Newton, I. & Rothery, P. (1997) Senescence and reproductive value
in sparrowhawks. Ecology , 78, 1000–1008.
Nicholson, A.J. (1954) An outline of the dynamics of animal popula-
tions. Australian Journal of Zoology , 2, 9–65.
Nicholson, A.J. & Bailey, V.A. (1935) The balance of animal popula-
tions. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London , 3, 551–598.
Niklas, K.J., Tiffney, B.H. & Knoll, A.H. (1983) Patterns in vascular
land plant diversiﬁcation. Nature , 303, 614–616.
Nilsson, L.A. (1988) The evolution of ﬂowers with deep corolla
tubes. Nature , 334, 147–149.Noble, J.C. & Slatyer, R.O. (1981) Concepts and models of succes-
sion in vascular plant communities subject to recurrent ﬁre. In:
Fire and the Australian Biota (A.M. Gill, R.H. Graves & I.R. Noble,
eds). Australian Academy of Science, Canberra.
Noble, J.C., Bell, A.D. & Harper, J.L. (1979) The population biology
of plants with clonal growth. I. The morphology and structural
demography of Carex arenaria. Journal of Ecology , 67, 983–1008.
Nolan, A.M., Atkinson, P.M. & Bullock, J.M. (1998) Modelling
change in the lowland heathlands of Dorset, England. In: Innova-
tionsin GIS 5 (S. Carver, ed.), pp. 234–243. Taylor & Francis, 
London.
Normabuena, H. & Piper, G.L. (2000) Impact of Apion ulicis Forster
on Ulex europaeus L. seed dispersal. Biological Control , 17, 267–
271.
Norton, I.O. & Sclater, J.G. (1979) A model for the evolution of 
the Indian Ocean and the breakup of Gondwanaland. Journal of
Geophysical Research , 84, 6803–6830.
Noy-Meir, I. (1975) Stability of grazing systems: an application of 
predator–prey graphs. Journal of Ecology , 63, 459–483.
Nunes, S., Zugger, P.A., Engh, A.L., Reinhart, K.O. & Holekamp,
K.E. (1997) Why do female Belding’s ground squirrels disperse away
from food resources. Behavioural Ecology and Sociobiology , 40,
199–207.
Nye, P.H. & Tinker, P.B. (1977) Solute Movement in the Soil–Root System .
Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
O’Brien, E.M. (1993) Climatic gradients in woody plant species rich-
ness: towards an explanation based on an analysis of southernAfrica’s woody ﬂora. Journal of Biogeography , 20, 181–198.
O’Neill, R.V. (1976) Ecosystem persistence and heterotrophic regula-
tion. Ecology , 57, 1244–1253.
Oakeshott, J.G., May, T.W., Gidson, J.B. & Willcocks, D.A. (1982)
Resource partitioning in ﬁve domestic Drosophila species and its
relationship to ethanol metabolism. Australian Journal of Zoology ,
30, 547–556.
Obeid, M., Machin, D. & Harper, J.L. (1967) Inﬂuence of density on
plant to plant variations in ﬁber ﬂax, Linum usitatissimum. Crop
Science , 7, 471–473.
Odum, E.P. & Biever, L.J. (1984) Resource quality, mutualism, 
and energy partitioning in food chains. American Naturalist , 124,
360–376.
Ødum, S. (1965) Germination of ancient seeds; ﬂoristical observations
and experiments with archaeologically dated soil samples. Dansk
Botanisk Arkiv , 24, 1–70.
Oedekoven, M.A. & Joern, A. (2000) Plant quality and spider pre-
dation affects grasshoppers (Acrididae): food-quality-dependent compensatory mortality. Ecology , 81, 66–77.
Ogden, J. (1968) Studies on Reproductive Strategy with Particular Reference
to Selected Composites . PhD thesis, University of Wales, UK.
Oinonen, E. (1967) The correlation between the size of Finnish
bracken ( Pteridium aquilinum (L.) Kuhn) clones and certain 
periods of site history. Acta Forestalia Fennica , 83, 3–96.
Oksanen, L. (1988) Ecosystem organisation: mutualism and cybernetics
of plain Darwinian struggle for existence. American Naturalist ,
131, 424–444.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 685686 REFERENCES
Oksanen, L., Fretwell, S., Arruda, J. & Niemela, P. (1981) Exploita-
tion ecosystems in gradients of primary productivity. American
Naturalist , 118, 240–261.
Oksanen, T.A., Koskela, E. & Mappes, T. (2002) Hormonal manip-
ulation of offspring number: maternal effort and reproductive costs.
Evolution , 56, 1530–1537.
Ollason, J.G. (1980) Learning to forage – optimally? Theoretical Popula-
tion Biology , 18, 44–56.
Ormerod, S.J. (2002) The uptake of applied ecology. Journal of Applied
Ecology , 39, 1–7.
Ormerod, S.J. (2003) Restoration in applied ecology: editor’s intro-
duction. Journal of Applied Ecology , 40, 44–50.
Orshan, G. (1963) Seasonal dimorphism of desert and Mediterranean
chamaephytes and its signiﬁcance as a factor in their water 
economy. In: The Water Relations of Plants (A.J. Rutter & F.W.
Whitehead, eds), pp. 207–222. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications,Oxford.
Osawa, A. & Allen, R.B. (1993) Allometric theory explains self-
thinning relationships of mountain beech and red pine. Ecology ,
74, 1020–1032.
Osem, Y., Perevolotsky, A. & Kigel, J. (2002) Grazing effect on 
diversity of annual plant communities in a semi-arid rangeland:interactions with small-scale spatial and temporal variation in primary productivity. Journal of Ecology , 90, 936–946.
Osmundson, D.B., Ryel, R.J., Lamarra, V.L. & Pitlick, J. (2002)
Flow–sediment–biota relations: implications for river regulationeffects on native ﬁsh abundance. Ecological Applications , 12, 1719–
1739.
Osono, T. & Takeda, H. (2001) Organic chemical and nutrient
dynamics in decomposing beech leaf litter in relation to fungalingrowth and succession during 3-year decomposition processesin a cool temperate deciduous forest in Japan. Ecological Research ,
16, 649–670.
Ostfeld, R.S. & Keesing, F. (2000) Biodiversity and disease risk: the
case of Lyme disease. Conservation Biology , 14, 722–728.
Ottersen, G., Planque, B., Belgrano, A., Post, E., Reid, P.C. &
Stenseth, N.C. (2001) Ecological effects of the North AtlanticOscillation. Oecologia , 128, 1–14.
Owen-Smith, N. (1987) Pleistocene extinctions: the pivotal role of 
megaherbivores. Paleobiology , 13, 351–362.
Pacala, S.W. (1997) Dynamics of plant communities. In: Plant Ecology
(M.J. Crawley, ed.), pp. 532–555. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Pacala, S.W. & Crawley, M.J. (1992) Herbivores and plant diversity.
American Naturalist , 140, 243–260.
Pacala, S.W. & Hassell, M.P. (1991) The persistence of host–parasitoid
associations in patchy environments. II. Evaluation of ﬁeld data.American Naturalist , 138, 584–605.
Pace, M.L., Cole, J.J., Carpenter, S.R. & Kitchell, J.F. (1999) Trophic
cascades revealed in diverse ecosystems. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 14, 483–488.
Packer, A. & Clay, K. (2000) Soil pathogens and spatial patterns of
seedling mortality in a temperate tree. Nature , 404, 278–281.
Paine, R.T. (1966) Food web complexity and species diversity.
American Naturalist , 100, 65–75.Paine, R.T. (1979) Disaster, catastrophe and local persistence of the
sea palm Postelsia palmaeformis. Science , 205, 685–687.
Paine, R.T. (1980) Food webs: linkage, interaction strength, and
community infrastructure. Journal of Animal Ecology , 49, 667–685.
Paine, R.T. (1994) Marine Rocky Shores and Community Ecology: an experi-
mentalist’s perspective . Ecology Institute, Oldendorf/Luhe, Germany.
Paine, R.T. (2002) Trophic control of production in a rocky intertidal
community. Science , 296, 736–739.
Palmblad, I.G. (1968) Competition studies on experimental popula-
tions of weeds with emphasis on the regulation of population size.Ecology , 49, 26–34.
Palmer, T.M., Young, T.P., Stanton, M.L. & Wenk, E. (2000) Short-
term dynamics of an acacia ant community in Laikipia, Kenya.
Oecologia , 123, 425–435.
Palmqvist, K. (2000) Carbon economy in lichens. New Phytologist
, 148,
11–36.
Park, T. (1948) Experimental studies of interspeciﬁc competition. 
I. Competition between populations of the ﬂour beetle Tribolium
confusum Duval and Tribolium castaneum Herbst. Ecological Mono-
graphs , 18, 267–307.
Park, T. (1954) Experimental studies of interspeciﬁc competiton. 
II. Temperature, humidity and competition in two species of
Tribolium. Physiological Zoology , 27, 177–238.
Park, T. (1962) Beetles, competition and populations. Science , 138,
1369–1375.
Park, T., Mertz, D.B., Grodzinski, W. & Prus, T. (1965) Cannibalistic
predation in populations of ﬂour beetles. Physiological Zoology , 38,
289–321.
Parker, G.A. (1970) The reproductive behaviour and the nature of
sexual selection in Scatophaga stercorraria L. (Diptera: Scatophagidae)
II. The fertilization rate and the spatial and temporal relationshipsof each sex around the site of mating and oviposition. Journal of
Animal Ecology , 39, 205–228.
Parker, G.A. (1984) Evolutionarily stable strategies. In: Behavioral Ecology:
an evolutionary approach , 2nd edn ( J.R. Krebs & N.B. Davies, eds),
pp. 30–61. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Parker, G.A. & Stuart, R.A. (1976) Animal behaviour as a strategy
optimizer: evolution of resource assessment strategies and optimalemigration thresholds. American Naturalist , 110, 1055–1076.
Parmesan, C. & Yohe, G. (2003) A globally coherent ﬁngerprint 
of climate change impacts across natural systems. Nature , 421,
38–42.
Partridge, L. & Farquhar, M. (1981) Sexual activity reduces lifespan
of male fruitﬂies. Nature , 294, 580–581.
Pastoret, P.P. & Brochier, B. (1999) Epidemiology and control of 
fox rabies in Europe. Vaccine , 17, 1750–1754.
Pate, J.S. (1994) The mycorrhizal association: just one of many 
nutrient acquiring specializations in natural ecosystems. Plant
and Soil , 159, 1–10.
Paterson, S. & Viney, M.E. (2002) Host immune responses are neces-
sary for density dependence in nematode infections. Parasitology ,
125, 283–292.
Pauly, D. & Christensen, V. (1995) Primary production required to
sustain global ﬁsheries. Nature , 374, 255–257.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 686REFERENCES 687
Pavia, H. & Toth, G.B. (2000) Inducible chemical resistance to herbivory
in the brown seaweed Ascophyllum nodosum . Ecology , 81, 3212–3225.
Payne, C.C. (1988) Pathogens for the control of insects: where next?
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 
318, 225–248.
Payne, R.B. (1977) The ecology of brood parasitism in birds. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics , 8, 1–28.
Pearcy, R.W., Björkman, O., Caldwell, M.M., Keeley, J.E., Monson, R.K.
& Strain, B.R. (1987) Carbon gain by plants in natural environ-
ments. Bioscience , 37, 21–29.
Pearl, R. (1928) The Rate of Living . Knopf, New York.
Pellmyr, O. & Leebens-Mack, J. (1999) Reversal of mutualism as 
a mechanism for adaptive radiation in yucca moths. American
Naturalist , 156, S62–S76.
Penn, A.M., Sherwin, W.B., Gordon, G., Lunney, D., Melzer, A. &
Lacy, R.C. (2000) Demographic forecasting in koala conservation.Conservation Biology , 14, 629–638.
Pennings, S.C. & Callaway, R.M. (2002) Parasitic plants: parallels and
contrasts with herbivores. Oecologia , 131, 479–489.
Perlman, S.J. & Jaenike, J. (2001) Competitive interactions and per-
sistence of two nematode species that parasitize Drosophila recens .
Ecology Letters , 4, 577–584.
Perrins, C.M. (1965) Population ﬂuctuations and clutch size in the
great tit, Parus major L. Journal of Animal Ecology , 34, 601–647.
Perry, J.N., Smith, R.H., Woiwod, I.P. & Morse, D.R. (eds) (2000)
Chaos in Real Data . Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Peters, R.H. (1983) The Ecological Implications of Body Size . Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Petit, J.R., Jouzel, J., Raynaud, D. et al. (1999) Climate and atmospheric
history of the past 420,000 years from the Vostok ice core,Antarctica. Nature , 399, 429–436.
Petranka, J.W. (1989) Chemical interference competition in tad-
poles: does it occur outside laboratory aquaria? Copeia , 1989,
921–930.
Petren, K. & Case, T.J. (1996) An experimental demonstration of 
exploitation competition in an ongoing invasion. Ecology , 77,
118–132.
Petren, K., Grant, B.R. & Grant, P.R. (1999) A phylogeny of Darwin’s
ﬁnches based on microsatellite DNA variation. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, Series B , 266, 321–329.
Pettifor, R.A., Perrins, C.M. & McCleery, R.H. (2001) The indi-
vidual optimization of ﬁtness: variation in reproductive output,including clutch size, mean nestling mass and offspring recruit-ment, in manipulated broods of great tits Parus major . Journal of
Animal Ecology , 70, 62–79.
Pianka, E.R. (1970) On r- and k-selection. American Naturalist , 104,
592–597.
Pianka, E.R. (1973) The structure of lizard communities. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics , 4, 53–74.
Pickett, J.A. (1988) Integrating use of beneﬁcial organisms with
chemical crop protection. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London, Series B , 318, 203–211.
Pickett, S.T.A. & White, P.S. (eds) (1985) The Ecology of Natural 
Disturbance as Patch Dynamics . Academic Press, New York.Piersma, T. & Davidson, N.C. (1992) The migrations and annual cycles
of ﬁve subspecies of knots in perspective. In: The Migration of Knots,
Wader Study Group Bulletin 64, Supplement, April 1992 , pp. 187–197.
Joint Nature Conservation Committee, Publications Branch,Peterborough, UK.
Pimentel, D., Lach, L., Zuniga, R. & Morrison, D. (2000) Environ-
mental and economic costs of nonindigenous species in theUnited States. BioScience , 50, 53–65.
Pimm, S.L. (1979) Complexitiy and stability: another look at
MacArthur’s original hypothesis. Oikos , 33, 351–357.
Pimm, S.L. (1982) Food Webs . Chapman & Hall, London.
Pimm, S.L. (1991) The Balance of Nature: ecological issues in the 
conservation of species and communities . University of Chicago
Press, Chicago and London.
Pimm, S.L. & Lawton, J.H. (1977) The number of trophic levels in
ecological communities. Nature , 275, 542–544.
Pimm, S.L. & Lawton, J.H. (1980) Are food webs divided into com-
partments? Journal of Animal Ecology , 49, 879–898.
Pimm, S.L. & Rice, J.C. (1987) The dynamics of multi-species, multi-
life-stage models of aquatic food webs. Theoretical Population
Biology , 32, 303–325.
Piraino, S., Fanelli, G. & Boero, F. (2002) Variability of species’ roles
in marine communities: change of paradigms for conservation priorities. Marine Biology , 140, 1067–1074.
Pisek, A., Larcher, W., Vegis, A. & Napp-Zin, K. (1973) The normal
temperature range. In: Temperature and Life (H. Precht, J. Christo-
pherson, H. Hense & W. Larcher, eds), pp. 102–194. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Pitcher, T.J. (2001) Fisheries managed to rebuild ecosystems? Re-
constructing the past to salvage the future. Ecological Applications ,
11, 601–617.
Pitcher, T.J. & Hart, P.J.B. (1982) Fisheries Ecology . Croom Helm,
London.
Plante, C.J., Jumars, P.A. & Baross, J.A. (1990) Digestive associations
between marine detritivores and bacteria. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics , 21, 93–127.
Playfair, J.H.L. (1996) Immunology at a Glance , 6th edn. Blackwell Science,
Oxford.
Podoler, H. & Rogers, D.J. (1975) A new method for the identiﬁca-
tion of key factors from life-table data. Journal of Animal Ecology ,
44, 85–114.
Pojar, T.M. (1981) A management perspective of population 
modelling. In: Dynamics of Large Mammal Populations (D.W. Fowler
& T.D. Smith, eds), pp. 241–261. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Polis, G.A. (1991) Complex trophic interactions in deserts: an 
empirical critique of food-web theory. American Naturalist , 138,
123–155.
Polis, G.A. (1999) Why are parts of the world green? Multiple 
factors control productivity and the distribution of biomass.
Oikos , 86, 3–15.
Polis, G.A. & Strong, D. (1996) Food web complexity and community
dynamics. American Naturalist , 147, 813–846.
Polis, G.A., Anderson, W.B. & Holt, R.D. (1997) Towards an integra-
tion of landscape and food web ecology: the dynamics of spatially
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 687688 REFERENCES
subsidized food webs. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics , 28,
289–316.
Polis, G.A., Sears, A.L.W., Huxel, G.R., Strong, D.R. & Maron, J. 
(2000) When is a trophic cascade a trophic cascade? Trends in Ecology
and Evolution , 15, 473–475.
Ponge, J.-F. (2000) Vertical distribution of Collembola (Hexapoda) 
and their food resources in organic horizons of beech forests. 
Biology and Fertility of Soils 32, 508–522.
Pope, S.E., Fahrig, L. & Merriam, H.G. (2000) Landscape comple-
mentation and metapopulation effects on leopard frog populations.
Ecology , 81, 2498–2508.
Possingham, H.P., Andelman, S.J., Burgman, M.A., Medellin, R.A.,
Master, L.L. & Keith, D.A. (2002) Limits to the use of threatened
species lists. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 17, 503–507.
Post, D.M., Pace, M.L. & Hairston, N.G. Jr. (2000) Ecosystem size
determines food-chain length in lakes. Nature , 405, 1047–1049.
Post, R.M. (2002) The long and the short of food-chain length. Trends
in Ecology and Evolution , 17, 269–277.
Poulson, M.E. & DeLucia, E.H. (1993) Photosynthetic and structural
acclimation to light direction in vertical leaves of Silphium tere-
binthaceum . Oecologia , 95, 393–400.
Power, M.E. (1990) Effects of ﬁsh in river food webs. Science , 250,
411–415.
Power, M.E., Tilman, D., Estes, J.A. et al. (1996) Challenges in the
quest for keystones. Bioscience , 46, 609–620.
Prach, K., Bartha, S., Joyce, C.A., Pysek, P., van Diggelen, R. & 
Wiegleb, G. (2001) The role of spontaneous vegetation succes-
sion in ecosystem restoration: a perspective. Applied Vegetation
Science , 4, 111–114.
Prance, G.T. (1987) Biogeography of neotropical plants. In: Biogeography
and Quaternary History of Tropical America (T.C. Whitmore & G.T.
Prance, eds), pp. 46–65. Oxford Monographs on Biogeography,No. 3. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Praw, J.C. & Grant, J.W.A. (1999) Optimal territory size in the 
convict cichlid. Behaviour , 136, 1347–1363.
Pressey, R.L. (1995) Conservation reserves in New South Wales: crown
jewels or leftovers. Search , 26, 47–51.
Pressey, R.L., Humphries, C.J., Margules, C.R., Vane-Wright, R.I. 
& Williams, P.H. (1993) Beyond opportunism: key principles forsystematic reserve selection. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 8,
124–128.
Preston, F.W. (1962) The canonical distribution of commoness and
rarity. Ecology , 43, 185–215, 410–432.
Preszler, R.W. & Price, P.W. (1993) The inﬂuence of Salix leaf abscis-
sion on leaf-miner survival and life-history. Ecological Entomology ,
18, 150–154.
Price, P.W. (1980) Evolutionary Biology of Parasites . Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton, NJ.
Primack, R.B. (1993) Essentials of Conservation Biology . Sinauer Asso-
ciates, Sunderland, MA.
Prior, H. & Johnes, P.J. (2002) Regulation of surface water quality in
a cretaceous chalk catchment, UK: an assessment of the relativeimportance of instream and wetland processes. Science of the Total
Environment , 282/283, 159–174.Proctor, M., Yeo, P. & Lack, A. (1996) The Natural History of Pollina-
tion. Harper Collins, London.
Proulx, M. & Mazumder, A. (1998) Reversal of grazing impact on
plant species richness in nutrient-poor vs nutrient-rich ecosystems.
Ecology , 79, 2581–2592.
Pulliam, H.R. (1988) Sources, sinks and population regulation. American
Naturalist
, 132, 652–661.
Pulliam, H.R. & Caraco, T. (1984) Living in groups: is there an optimal
group size? In: Behavioural Ecology: an evolutionary approach , 
2nd edn ( J.R. Krebs & N.B. Davies, eds), pp. 122–147. BlackwellScientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Punnett, R.C. (1933) Inheritance of egg-colour in the parasitic 
cuckoos. Nature , 132, 892.
Putman, R.J. (1978) Patterns of carbon dioxide evolution from
decaying carrion. Decomposition of small carrion in temperate
systems. Oikos , 31, 47–57.
Putman, R.J. (1983) Carrion and Dung: the decomposition of animal
wastes . Edward Arnold, London.
Pyke, G.H. (1982) Local geographic distributions of bumblebees
near Crested Butte, Colorada: competition and communitystructure. Ecology , 63, 555–573.
Pywell, R.F., Bullock, J.M., Hopkins, A. et al. (2002) Restoration 
of species-rich grassland on arable land: assessing the limiting processes using a multi-site experiment. Journal of Applied Ecology ,
39, 294–309.
Pywell, R.F., Bullock, J.M., Roy, D.B., Warman, L., Walker, K.J. 
& Rothery, P. (2003) Plant traits as predictors of performance inecological restoration. Journal of Applied Ecology , 40, 65–77.
Quinn, J.F. & Harrison, S.P. (1988) Effects of habitat fragmentation
and isolation on species richness – evidence from biogeographicpatterns. Oecologia , 75, 132–140.
Raffaelli, D. & Hawkins, S. (1996) Intertidal Ecology . Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Rahbek, C. (1995) The elevational gradient of species richness: a 
uniform pattern? Ecography , 18, 200–205.
Rainey, P.B. & Trevisano, M. (1998) Adaptive radiation in a hetero-
geneous environment. Nature , 394, 69–72.
Ramirez, O.A. & Saunders, J.L. (1999) Estimating economic thresh-
olds for pest control: an alternative procedure. Journal of Economic
Entomology , 92, 391–401.
Randall, M.G.M. (1982) The dynamics of an insect population
throughout its altitudinal distribution: Coleophora alticolella
(Lepidoptera) in northern England. Journal of Animal Ecology , 51,
993–1016.
Ranta, E., Kaitala, V., Alaja, S. & Tesar, D. (2000) Nonlinear dynamics
and the evolution of semelparous and iteroparous reproductivestrategies. American Naturalist , 155, 294–300.
Rapport, D.J., Costanza, R. & McMichael, A.J. (1998) Assessing
ecosystem health. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 13, 397–402.
Rätti, O., Dufva, R. & Alatalo, R.V. (1993) Blood parasites and male
ﬁtness in the pied ﬂycatcher. Oecologia , 96, 410–414.
Raunkiaer, C. (1934) The Life Forms of Plants . Oxford University Press,
Oxford. (Translated from the original published in Danish, 1907.)
Raup, D.M. (1978) Cohort analysis of generic survivorship. Paleo-
biology , 4, 1–15.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 688REFERENCES 689
Rausher, M.D. (1978) Search image for leaf shape in a butterﬂy. Science ,
200, 1071–1073.
Rausher, M.D. (2001) Co-evolution and plant resistance to natural 
enemies. Nature , 411, 857–864.
Raushke, E., Haar, T.H. von der, Bardeer, W.R. & Paternak, M. (1973)
The annual radiation of the earth–atmosphere system during
1969–70 from Nimbus measurements. Journal of the Atmospheric
Science , 30, 341–346.
Ray, J.C. & Sunquist, M.E. (2001) Trophic relations in a community
of African rainforest carnivores. Oecologia , 127, 395–408.
Read, A.F. & Harvey, P.H. (1989) Life history differences among the
eutherian radiations. Journal of Zoology , 219, 329–353.
Read, D.J. (1996) The structure and function of the ericoid mycor-
rhizal root. Annals of Botany , 77, 365–374.
Redfern, M., Jones, T.H. & Hassell, M.P. (1992) Heterogeneity 
and density dependence in a ﬁeld study of a tephritid–parasitoid
interaction. Ecological Entomology , 17, 255–262.
Reece, C.H. (1985) The role of the chemical industry in improving
the effectiveness of agriculture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London, Series B , 310, 201–213.
Reed, D.H., O’Grady, J.J., Brook, B.W., Ballou, J.D. & Frankham, R.
(2003) Estimates of minimum viable population sizes for vertebratesand factors inﬂuencing those estimates. Biological Conservation , 113,
23–34.
Rees, M., Condit, R., Crawley, M., Pacala, S. & Tilman, D. (2001)
Long-term studies of vegetation dynamics. Science , 293, 650–655.
Reeve, J.D., Rhodes, D.J. & Turchin, P. (1998) Scramble competition
in the southern pine beetle, Dendroctonus frontalis . Ecological
Entomology , 23, 433–443.
Reganold, J.P., Glover, J.D., Andrews, P.K. & Hinman, H.R. (2001)
Sustainability of three apple production systems. Nature , 410,
926–929.
Reich, P.B., Grigal, D.F., Aber, J.D. & Gower, S.T. (1997) Nitrogen
mineralization and productivity in 50 hardwood and coniferstands on diverse soils. Ecology , 78, 335–347.
Reid, W.V. & Miller, K.R. (1989) Keeping Options Alive: the scientiﬁc
basis for conserving biodiversity . World Resources Insititute,
Washington, DC.
Rejmanek, M. & Richardson, D.M. (1996) What attributes make some
plant species more invasive? Ecology , 77, 1655–1660.
Reunanen, P., Monkkonen, M. & Nikula, A. (2000) Managing boreal
forest landscapes for ﬂying squirrels. Conservation Biology , 14,
218–227.
Reznick, D.N. (1982) The impact of predation on life history evolu-
tion in Trinidadian guppies: genetic basis of observed life historypatterns. Evolution , 36, 1236–1250.
Reznick, D.N. (1985) Cost of reproduction: an evaluation of the
empirical evidence. Oikos , 44, 257–267.
Reznick, D.N., Bryga, H. & Endler, J.A. (1990) Experimentally induced
life history evolution in a natural population. Nature , 346, 357–359.
Rhoades, D.F. & Cates, R.G. (1976) Towards a general theory of plant
antiherbivore chemistry. Advances in Phytochemistry , 110, 168–213.
Ribas, C.R., Schoereder, J.H., Pic, M. & Soares, S.M. (2003) Tree 
heterogeneity, resource availability, and larger scale processes regulating arboreal ant species richness. Austral Ecology , 28,
305–314.
Ribble, D.O. (1992) Dispersal in a monogamous rodent, Peromyscus
californicus. Ecology , 73, 859–866.
Ricciardi, A. (2001) Facilitative interactions among aquatic invaders: is
an ‘invasional meltdown’ occurring in the Great Lakes? 
Canadian
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Science , 58, 2513–2525.
Ricciardi, A. & MacIsaac, H.J. (2000) Recent mass invasion of the North
American Great Lakes by Ponto-Caspian species. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution , 15, 62–65.
Richards, O.W. & Waloff, N. (1954) Studies on the biology and 
population dynamics of British grasshoppers. Anti-Locust Bulletin ,
17, 1–182.
Richman, A.D., Case, T.J. & Schwaner, T.D. (1988) Natural and 
unnatural extinction rates of reptiles on islands. American Naturalist ,
131, 611–630.
Rickards, J., Kelleher, M.J. & Storey, K.B. (1987) Strategies of freeze
avoidance in larvae of the goldenrod gall moth Epiblema scudderiana :
winter proﬁles of a natural population. Journal of Insect Physiology ,
33, 581–586.
Ricklefs, R.E. & Lovette, I.J. (1999) The role of island area per se
and habitat diversity in the species–area relationships of fourLesser Antillean faunal groups. Journal of Animal Ecology , 68,
1142–1160.
Ridley, M. (1993) Evolution . Blackwell Science, Boston.
Rigler, F.H. (1961) The relation between concentration of food and
feeding rate of Daphnia magna Straus. Canadian Journal of Zoology ,
39, 857–868.
Riis, T. & Sand-Jensen, K. (1997) Growth reconstruction and photo-
synthesis of aquatic mosses: inﬂuence of light, temperature andcarbon dioxide at depth. Journal of Ecology , 85, 359–372.
Ringel, M.S., Hu, H.H. & Anderson, G. (1996) The stability and 
persistence of mutualisms embedded in community interactions.Theoretical Population Biology , 50, 281–297.
Robertson, J.H. (1947) Responses of range grasses to different inten-
sities of competition with sagebrush ( Artemisia tridentata Nutt.).
Ecology , 28, 1–16.
Robinson, S.P., Downton, W.J.S. & Millhouse, J.A. (1983) Photo-
synthesis and ion content of leaves and isolated chloroplasts ofsalt-stressed spinach. Plant Physiology , 73, 238–242.
Rohani, P., Godfray, H.C.J. & Hassell, M.P. (1994) Aggregation and
the dynamics of host–parasitoid systems: a discrete-generationmodel with within-generation redistribution. American Naturalist ,
144, 491–509.
Rombough, P. (2003) Modelling developmental time and temperature.
Nature , 424, 268–269.
Room, P.M., Harley, K.L.S., Forno, I.W. & Sands, D.P.A. (1981)
Successful biological control of the ﬂoating weed Salvinia. Nature ,
294, 78–80.
Room, P.M., Maillette, L. & Hanan, J.S. (1994) Module and metamer
dynamics and virtual plants. Advances in Ecological Research , 25,
105–157.
Root, R. (1967) The niche exploitation pattern of the blue-grey 
gnatcatcher. Ecological Monographs , 37, 317–350.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 689690 REFERENCES
Rose, M.R., Service, P.M. & Hutchinson, E.W. (1987) Three
approaches to trade-offs in life-history evolution. In: Genetic 
Constraints on Evolution (V. Loeschke, ed.). Springer, Berlin.
Rosenthal, G.A., Dahlman, D.L. & Janzen, D.H. (1976) A novel means
for dealing with l-canavanine, a toxic metabolite. Science , 192,
256–258.
Rosenzweig, M.L. (1971) Paradox of enrichment: destabilization of
exploitation ecosystems in ecological time. Science , 171, 385–387.
Rosenzweig, M.L. (2003) How to reject the area hypothesis of 
latitudinal gradients. In: Macroecology: concepts and consequences
(T.M. Blackburn & K.J. Gaston, eds), pp. 87–106. Blackwell
Publishing, Oxford.
Rosenzweig, M.L. & MacArthur, R.H. (1963) Graphical representation
and stability conditions of predator–prey interactions. American
Naturalist , 97, 209–223.
Rosenzweig, M.L. & Sandlin, E.A. (1997) Species diversity and latitudes:
listening to area’s signal. Oikos , 80, 172–176.
Rosenzweig, M.L. & Ziv, Y. (1999) The echo pattern in species
diversity: pattern and process. Ecography , 22, 614–628.
Ross, K., Cooper, N., Bidwell, J.R. & Elder, J. (2002) Genetic diversity
and metal tolerance of two marine species: a comparison betweenpopulations from contaminated and reference sites. Marine Pollu-
tion Bulletin , 44, 671–679.
Roth, J.D. (2002) Temporal variability in arctic fox diet as reﬂected
in stable-carbon isotopes: the importance of sea ice. Oecologia , 133,
70–77.
Roughan, M. & Middleton, J.H. (2002) A comparison of observed
upwelling mechanisms off the east coast of Australia. Continental
Shelf Research , 22, 2551–2572.
Roush, R.T. & McKenzie, J.A. (1987) Ecological genetics of in-
secticide and acaricide resistance. Annual Review of Entomology , 
32, 361–380.
Rowan, R., Knowlton, N., Baker, A. & Jara, J. (1997) Landscape 
ecology of algal symbionts creates variation in episodes of coralbleaching. Nature , 388, 265–269.
Rowe, C.L. (2002) Differences in maintenance energy expenditure 
by two estuarine shrimp ( Palaemonetes pugio and P. vulgaris ) 
that may permit partitioning of habitats by salinity. Comparative
Biochemistry and Physiology Part A , 132, 341–351.
Royama, T. (1992) Analytical Population Dynamics . Chapman & Hall,
London.
Ruiters, C. & McKenzie, B. (1994) Seasonal allocation and efﬁciency
patterns of biomass and resources in the perennial geophyteSparaxis grandiﬂora subspecies ﬁmbriata (Iridaceae) in lowland
coastal Fynbos, South Africa. Annals of Botany , 74, 633–646.
Rundle, H.D., Nagel, L., Boughman, J.W. & Schluter, D. (2000) Natural
selection and parallel speciation in sympatric sticklebacks. Science ,
287, 306–308.
Ryan, C.A. & Jagendorf, A. (1995) Self defense by plants. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science of the USA , 92, 4075.
Ryan, C.A., Lamb, C.J., Jagendorf, A.T. & Kolattukudy, P.E. (eds) 
(1995) Self-defense by plants: induction and signalling path-ways. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the USA , 92,
4075–4205.Sackville Hamilton, N.R., Matthew, C. & Lemaire, G. (1995) In defence
of the –3/2 boundary line: a re-evaluation of self-thinning con-
cepts and status. Annals of Botany , 76, 569–577.
Sackville Hamilton, N.R., Schmid, B. & Harper, J.L. (1987) Life 
history concepts and the population biology of clonal organisms.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 232, 35–57.
Sale, P.F. (1977) Maintenance of high diversity in coral reef ﬁsh 
communities. American Naturalist , 111, 337–359.
Sale, P.F. (1979) Recruitment, loss and coexistence in a guild of 
territorial coral reef ﬁshes. Oecologia , 42, 159–177.
Salisbury, E.J. (1942) The Reproductive Capacity of Plants . Bell, London.
Salonen, K., Jones, R.I. & Arvola, L. (1984) Hypolimnetic retrieval by
diel vertical migrations of lake phytoplankton. Freshwater Biology ,
14, 431–438.
Saloniemi, I. (1993) An environmental explanation for the character
displacement pattern in Hydrobia snails. Oikos , 67, 75–80.
Salt, D.E., Smith, R.D. & Raskin, I. (1998) Phytoremediation. Annual
Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology , 49, 643–668.
Samelius, G. & Alisauskas, R.T. (2000) Foraging patterns of arctic foxes
at a large arctic goose colony. Arctic , 53, 279–288.
Sanchez-Pinero, F. & Polis, G.A. (2000) Bottom-up dynamics of
allochthonous input: direct and indirect effects of seabirds on islands.
Ecology , 81, 3117–3132.
Sanders, N.J., Moss, J. & Wagner, D. (2003) Patterns of ant species
richness along elevational gradients in an arid ecosystem. Global
Ecology and Biogeography , 12, 93–102.
Saunders, M.A. (1999) Earth’s future climate. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society of London, Series A , 357, 3459–3480.
Savenko, V.S. (2001) Global hydrological cycle and geochemical 
balance of phosphorus in the ocean. Oceanology , 41, 360–366.
Savidge, J.A. (1987) Extinction of an island forest avifauna by an intro-
duced snake. Ecology , 68, 660–668.
Sax, D.F. & Gaines, S.D. (2003) Species diversity: from global decreases
to local increases. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 18, 561–566.
Schaefer, M.B. (1954) Some aspects of the dynamics of populations
important to the management of marine ﬁsheries. Bulletin of the
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission , 1, 27–56.
Schaffer, W.M. (1974) Optimal reproductive effort in ﬂuctuating
environments. American Naturalist , 108, 783–790.
Schaffer, W.M. & Kot, M. (1986) Chaos in ecological systems: the
coals that Newcastle forgot. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 1, 
58–63.
Schall, J.J. (1992) Parasite-mediated competition in Anolis lizards.
Oecologia , 92, 58–64.
Schimel, D. & Baker, D. (2002) The wildﬁre factor. Nature , 420, 29–30.
Schindler, D.E. (1977) Evolution of phosphorus limitation in lakes.
Science , 195, 260–262.
Schindler, D.E. & Scheuerell, M.D. (2002) Habitat coupling in lake
ecosystems. Oikos , 98, 177–189.
Schindler, D.E., Knapp, K.A. & Leavitt, P.R. (2001) Alteration of 
nutrient cycles and algal production resulting from ﬁsh introduc-tions into mountain lakes. Ecosystems , 4, 308–321.
Schluter, D. (2001) Ecology and the origin of species. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution , 16, 372–380.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 690REFERENCES 691
Schluter, D. & McPhail, J.D. (1992) Ecological character displacement
and speciation in sticklebacks. American Naturalist , 140, 85–108.
Schluter, D. & McPhail, J.D. (1993) Character displacement and replic-
ate adaptive radiation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 8, 197–200.
Schlyter, F. & Anderbrant, O. (1993) Competition and niche separa-
tion between two bark beetles: existence and mechanisms. Oikos ,
68, 437–447.
Schmidt-Nielsen, K. (1984) Scaling: why is animal size so important?
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Schmitt, R.J. (1987) Indirect interactions between prey: apparent
competition, predator aggregation, and habitat segregation. Ecology ,
68, 1887–1897.
Schmitz, O.J., Hamback, P.A. & Beckerman, A.P. (2000) Trophic 
cascades in terrestrial systems: a review of the effects of carnivore
removals on plants. American Naturalist , 155, 141–153.
Schoener, T.W. (1974) Resource partitioning in ecological commun-
ities. Science , 185, 27–39.
Schoener, T.W. (1983) Field experiments on interspeciﬁc competition.
American Naturalist , 122, 240–285.
Schoener, T.W. (1989) Food webs from the small to the large. Ecology ,
70, 1559–1589.
Schoenly, K., Beaver, R.A. & Heumier, T.A. (1991) On the trophic
relations of insects: a food-web approach. American Naturalist , 137,
597–638.
Schultz, J.C. (1988) Plant responses induced by herbivory. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution , 3, 45–49.
Schüßler, A., Schwarzott, D. & Walker, C. (2001) A new fungal 
phylum, the Glomeromycota : phylogeny and evolution. Mycological
Research , 105, 1413–1421.
Schwarz, C.J. & Seber, G.A.F. (1999) Estimating animal abundance:
review III. Statistical Science 14, 427–456.
Scott, M.P. (1998) The ecology and behaviour of burying beetles. Annual
Review of Entomology , 43, 595–618.
Scurlock, J.M.O., Johnson, K. & Olson, R.J. (2002) Estimating net 
primary productivity from grassland biomass dynamic measure-ments. Global Change Biology , 8, 736–753.
Semere, T. & Froud-Williams, R.J. (2001) The effect of pea cul-
tivar and water stress on root and shoot competition between vegetative plants of maize and pea. Journal of Applied Ecology ,
38, 137–145.
Severini, M., Baumgärtner, J. & Limonta, L. (2003) Parameter 
estimation for distributed delay based population models from laboratory data: egg hatching of Oulema duftschmidi . Ecological
Modelling , 167, 233–246.
Sexstone, A.Y., Parkin, T.B. & Tiedje, J.M. (1985) Temporal response
of soil denitriﬁcation rates to rainfall and irrigation. Soil Science
Society of America Journal , 49, 99–103.
Shankar Raman, T., Rawat, G.S. & Johnsingh, A.J.T. (1998) Recovery
of tropical rainforest avifauna in relation to vegetation successionfollowing shifting cultivation in Mizoram, north-east India.Journal of Applied Ecology , 35, 214–231.
Shaw, D.J. & Dobson, A.P. (1995) Patterns of macroparasite abund-
ance and aggregation in wildlife populations: a quantitative review.Parasitology , 111, S111–S133.Shea, K. & Chesson, P. (2002) Community ecology theory as a
framework for biological invasions. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 17, 170–177.
Shea, K. & Kelly, D. (1998) Estimating biocontrol agent impact 
with matrix models: Carduus nutans in New Zealand. Ecological
Applications , 8, 824–832.
Sherman, R.E., Fahey, T.J. & Battles, J.J. (2000) Small-scale disturbance
and regeneration dynamics in a neotropical mangrove forest.
Journal of Ecology , 88, 165–178.
Sherratt, T.N. (2002) The coevolution of warning signals. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 269, 741–746.
Shirley, B.W. (1996) Flavonoid biosynthesis: ‘new’ functions for an
old pathway. Trends in Plant Science , 1, 377–382.
Shorrocks, B. & Rosewell, J. (1987) Spatial patchiness and com-
munity structure: coexistence and guild size of drosophilids on
ephemeral resources. In: Organization of Communities: past and 
present ( J.H.R. Gee & P.S. Giller, eds), pp. 29–52. Blackwell
Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Shorrocks, B., Rosewell, J. & Edwards, K. (1990) Competition on 
a divided and ephemeral resource: testing the assumptions. II.
Association. Journal of Animal Ecology , 59, 1003–1017.
Shykoff, J.A. & Bucheli, E. (1995) Pollinator visitation patterns, ﬂoral
rewards and the probability of transmission of Micro-botryum vio-
laceum , a venereal disease of plants. Journal of Ecology , 83, 189–198.
Sibly, R.M. & Calow, P. (1983) An integrated approach to life-cycle
evolution using selective landscapes. Journal of Theoretical Biology ,
102, 527–547.
Sibly, R.M. & Hone, J. (2002) Population growth rate and its 
determinants: an overview. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London, Series B , 357, 1153–1170.
Sibly, R.M. & Smith, R.H. (1998) Identifying key factors using 
λ-contribution analysis. Journal of Animal Ecology , 67, 17–24.
Sih, A. (1982) Foraging strategies and the avoidance of predation by
an aquatic insect, Notonecta hoffmanni. Ecology , 63, 786–796.
Sih, A. & Christensen, B. (2001) Optimal diet theory: when does 
it work, and when and why does it fail? Animal Behaviour , 61,
379–390.
Sih, A., Crowley, P., McPeek, M., Petranka, J. & Strohmeier, K. 
(1985) Predation, competition and prey communities: a review of ﬁeld experiments. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics , 16,
269–311.
Silulwane, N.F., Richardson, A.J., Shillington, F.A. & Mitchell-Innes,
B.A. (2001) Identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of vertical chlorophyllpatterns in the Benguela upwelling system and Angola-Benguelafront using an artiﬁcial neural network. South African Journal of
Marine Science , 23, 37–51.
Silvertown, J.W. (1980) The evolutionary ecology of mast seeding in
trees. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society , 14, 235–250.
Silvertown, J.W. (1982) Introduction to Plant Population Ecology .
Longman, London.
Silvertown, J.W., Franco, M., Pisanty, I. & Mendoza, A. (1993)
Comparative plant demography – relative importance of life-cyclecomponents to the ﬁnite rate of increase in woody and herbaceousperennials. Journal of Ecology , 81, 465–476.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 691692 REFERENCES
Silvertown, J.W., Holtier, S., Johnson, J. & Dale, P. (1992) Cellular
automaton models of interspeciﬁc competition for space – the effect
of pattern on process. Journal of Ecology , 80, 527–533.
Simberloff, D.S. (1976) Experimental zoogeography of islands:
effects of island size. Ecology , 57, 629– 648.
Simberloff, D. (1998) Small and declining populations. In: Conservation
Science and Action (W.J. Sutherland, ed.), pp. 116–134. Blackwell
Science, Oxford.
Simberloff, D. (2003) How much information on population biology
is needed to manage introduced species? Conservation Biology , 17,
83–92.
Simberloff, D. & Von Holle, B. (1999) Positive interactions of non-
indigenous species: invasional meltdown? Biological Invasions , 1,
21–32.
Simberloff, D.S. & Wilson, E.O. (1969) Experimental zoogeography
of islands: the colonization of empty islands. Ecology , 50, 278–296.
Simberloff, D., Dayan, T., Jones, C. & Ogura, G. (2000) Character
displacement and release in the small Indian mongoose, Herpestes
javanicus . Ecology , 81, 2086–2099.
Simo, R. (2001) Production of atmospheric sulfur by oceanic plankton:
biogeochemical, ecological and evolutionary links. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution , 16, 287–294.
Simon, K.S. & Townsend, C.R. (2003) The impacts of freshwater
invaders at different levels of ecological organisation, with emphasis
on ecosystem consequences. Freshwater Biology , 48, 982–994.
Simon, K.S., Townsend, C.R., Biggs, B.J.F., Bowden, W.B. & Frew, R.D.
(2004) Habitat-speciﬁc nitrogen dynamics in New Zealandstreams containing native or invasive ﬁsh. Ecosystems, 7, 1–16.
Simpson, G.G. (1952) How many species? Evolution , 6, 342.
Sinclair, A.R.E. (1975) The resource limitation of trophic levels in trop-
ical grassland ecosystems. Journal of Animal Ecology , 44, 497–520.
Sinclair, A.R.E. (1989) The regulation of animal populations. In: Eco-
logical Concepts ( J. Cherrett, ed.), pp. 197–241. Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, Oxford.
Sinclair, A.R.E. & Gosline J.M. (1997) Solar activity and mammal cycles
in the Northern Hemisphere. American Naturalist , 149, 776–784.
Sinclair, A.R.E. & Norton-Grifﬁths, M. (1982) Does competition or
facilitation regulate migrant ungulate populations in the Serengeti?A test of hypothesis. Oecologia , 53, 354–369.
Sinervo, B. (1990) The evolution of maternal investment in lizards:
an experimental and comparative analysis of egg size and itseffects on offspring performance. Evolution , 44, 279–294.
Sinervo, B., Svensson, E. & Comendant, T. (2000) Density cycles and
an offspring quantity and quality game driven by natural selection.Nature , 406, 985–988.
Singleton, G., Krebs, C.J., Davis, S., Chambers, L. & Brown, P. (2001)
Reproductive changes in ﬂuctuating house mouse populations insoutheastern Australia. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London,
Series B , 268, 1741–1748.
Siva-Jothy, M.T., Katsubaki, Y., Hooper, R.E. & Plaistow, S.J. (2001)
Investment in immune function under chronic and acute immune
challenge in an insect. Physiological Entomology , 26, 1–5.
Skogland, T. (1983) The effects of dependent resource limitation on
size of wild reindeer. Oecologia , 60, 156–168.Slobodkin, L.B., Smith, F.E. & Hairston, N.G. (1967) Regulation in
terrestrial ecosystems, and the implied balance of nature. American
Naturalist , 101, 109–124.
Smith, F.D.M., May, R.M., Pellew, R., Johnson, T.H. & Walter, K.R.
(1993) How much do we know about the current extinction rate?
Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 8, 375–378.
Smith, J.W. (1998) Boll weevil eradication: area-wide pest manage-
ment. Annals of the Entomological Society of America , 91, 239–247.
Smith, R.S., Shiel, R.S., Bardgett, R.D. et al. (2003) Soil microbial 
community, fertility, vegetation and diversity as targets in the
restoration management of a meadow grassland. Journal of Applied
Ecology , 40, 51–64.
Smith, S.D., Dinnen-Zopfy, B. & Nobel, P.S. (1984) High temperature
responses of North American cacti. Ecology , 6, 643–651.
Snaydon, R.W. (1996) Above-ground and below-ground interactions
in intercropping. In: Dynamics and Nitrogen in Cropping Systems 
of the Semi-arid Tropics (O. Ito, C. Johansen, J.J. Adu-Gyamﬁ, 
K. Katayama, J.V.D.K. Kumar Rao & T.J. Rego, eds), pp. 73–92.
JIRCAS, Kasugai, Japan.
Snell, T.W. (1998) Chemical ecology of rotifers. Hydrobiologia , 388,
267–276.
Snyman, A. (1949) The inﬂuence of population densities on the develop-
ment and oviposition of Plodia interpunctella Hubn. (Lepidoptera).
Journal of the Entomological Society of South Africa , 12, 137–171.
Soares, S.M., Schoereder, J.H. & DeSouza, O. (2001) Processes
involved in species saturation of ground-dwelling ant communi-ties (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). Austral Ecology , 26, 187–192.
Soderquist, T.R. (1994) The importance of hypothesis testing in 
reintroduction biology: examples from the reintroduction of the carnivorous marsupial Phascogale tapoatafa . In: Reintroduction
Biology of Australian and New Zealand Fauna (M. Serena, ed.), 
pp. 156–164. Beaty & Sons, Chipping Norton, UK.
Sol, D. & Lefebvre, L. (2000) Behavioural ﬂexibility predicts invasion
success in birds introduced to New Zealand. Oikos , 90, 599–605.
Solbrig, O.T. & Simpson, B.B. (1974) Components of regulation of
a population of dandelions in Michigan. Journal of Ecology , 62,
473–486.
Soler, J.J., Martinez, J.G., Soler, M. & Moller, A.P. (2001) Life history
of magpie populations sympatric or allopatric with the brood parasitic great spotted cuckoo. Ecology , 82, 1621–1631.
Solomon, M.E. (1949) The natural control of animal populations. Journal
of Animal Ecology , 18, 1–35.
Sommer, U. (1990) Phytoplankton nutrient competition – from 
laboratory to lake. In: Perspectives on Plant Competition ( J.B. Grace
& D. Tilman, eds), pp. 193–213. Academic Press, New York.
Sorrell, B.K., Hawes, I., Schwarz, A.-M. & Sutherland, D. (2001) Inter-
specﬁc differences in photosynthetic carbon uptake, photosynthatepartitioning and extracellular organic carbon release by deep-water characean algae. Freshwater Biology , 46, 453–464.
Soulé, M.E. (1986) Conservation Biology: the science of scarcity and diver-
sity. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.
Sousa, M.E. (1979a) Experimental investigation of disturbance and
ecological succession in a rocky intertidal algal community.Ecological Monographs , 49, 227–254.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 692REFERENCES 693
Sousa, M.E. (1979b) Disturbance in marine intertidal boulder ﬁelds:
the nonequilibrium maintenance of species diversity. Ecology , 60,
1225–1239.
South, A.B., Rushton, S.P., Kenward, R.E. & Macdonald, D.W.
(2002) Modelling vertebrate dispersal and demography in real 
landscapes: how does uncertainty regarding dispersal behavi-our inﬂuence predictions of spatial population dynamics. In:Dispersal Ecology ( J.M. Bullock, R.E. Kenward & R.S. Hails, eds),
pp. 327–349. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Southwood, T.R.E. & Henderson, P.H. (2000) Ecological Methods , 3rd
edn. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Southwood, T.R.E., Hassell, M.P., Reader, P.M. & Rogers, D.J. (1989)
The population dynamics of the viburnum whiteﬂy ( Aleurotrachelus
jelinekii ). Journal of Animal Ecology , 58, 921–942.
Speed, M.P. (1999) Batesian, quasi-Batesian or Müllerian mimicry?
Theory and data in mimicry research. Evolutionary Ecology , 13,
755–776.
Speed, M. & Ruxton, G.D. (2002) Animal behaviour: evolution of sui-
cidal signals. Nature , 416, 375.
Spiller, D.A. & Schoener, T.W. (1994) Effects of a top and intermediate
predators in a terrestrial food web. Ecology , 75, 182–196.
Spiller, D.A. & Schoener, T.W. (1998) Lizards reduce spider species
richness by excluding rare species. Ecology , 79, 503–516.
Sprent, J.I. (1979) The Biology of Nitrogen Fixing Organisms . McGraw
Hill, London.
Sprent, J.I. & Sprent, P. (1990) Nitrogen Fixing Organisms: pure and applied
aspects . Chapman & Hall, London.
Sprules, W.G. & Bowerman, J.E. (1988) Omnivory and food chain
length in zooplankton food webs. Ecology , 69, 418–426.
Srivastava, D.S. (1999) Using local-regional richness plots to test for
species saturation: pitfalls and potentials. Journal of Animal Ecology ,
68, 1–16.
Staaland, H., White, R.G., Luick, J.R. & Holleman, D.F. (1980) Dietary
inﬂuences on sodium and potassium metabolism of reindeer.
Canadian Journal of Zoology , 58, 1728–1734.
Stadler, B. & Dixon, A.F.G. (1998) Costs of ant attendance for aphids.
Journal of Animal Ecology , 67, 454–459.
Stafford, J. (1971) Heron populations of England and Wales 1928–70.
Bird Study , 18, 218–221.
Stark, J.D. (1993) Performance of the Macroinvertebrate Com-
munity Index: effects of sampling method, sample replication, waterdepth, current velocity, and substratum on index values. New
Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research , 27, 463–478.
Statzner, B.E., Fievet, J.Y. Champagne, R., Morel, D. & Herouin, E.
(2000) Crayﬁsh as geomorphic agents and ecosystem engineers:biological behavior affects sand and gravel erosion in experimentalstreams. Limnology and Oceanography , 45, 1030–1040.
Stauffer, B. (2000) Long term climate records from polar ice. Space
Science Reviews , 94, 321–336.
Stearns, S.C. (1977) The evolution of life history traits. Annual Review
of Ecology and Systematics , 8, 145–171.
Stearns, S.C. (1983) The impact of size and phylogeny on patterns 
of covariation in the life history traits of mammals. Oikos , 41,
173–187.Stearns, S.C. (1992) The Evolution of Life Histories . Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Stearns, S.C. (2000) Life history evolution: successes, limitations, and
prospects. Naturwissenschaften , 87, 476–486.
Steinauer, E.M. & Collins, S.L. (2001) Feedback loops in ecological
hierarchies following urine deposition in tallgrass prairie. Ecology ,
82, 1319–1329.
Steingrimsson, S.O. & Grant, J.W.A. (1999) Allometry of territory-
size and metabolic rate as predictors of self-thinning in young-of-the-year Atlantic salmon. Journal of Animal Ecology
, 68, 17–26.
Stemberger, R.S. & Gilbert, J.J. (1984) Spine development in the rotifer
Keratella cochlearis : induction by cyclopoid copepods and Asplachna.
Freshwater Biology , 14, 639–648.
Stenberg, P., Palmroth, S., Bond, B.J., Sprugel, D.G. & Smolander, H.
(2001) Shoot structure and photosynthetic efﬁciency along the light
gradient in Scots pine canopy. Tree Physiology , 21, 805–814.
Stenseth, N.C., Bjørnstad, O.N. & Saihto, T. (1996) A gradient from
stable to cyclic populations of Clethrionomys rufocanus in Hokkaido,
Japan. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 263,
1117–1126.
Stenseth, N.C., Falck, W., Bjørnstad, O.N. & Krebs, C.J. (1997) Popula-
tion regulation in snowshoe hare and Canadian lynx: asymmetric
food web conﬁgurations between hare and lynx. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA , 94, 5147–5152.
Stenseth, N.C., Ottersen, G., Hurrell, J.W. et al. (2003) Studying 
climate effects on ecology through the use of climate indices: 
the North Atlantic Oscillation, El Nino Southern Oscillation andbeyond. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 270,
2087–2096.
Stephens, D.W. & Krebs, J.R. (1986) Foraging Theory . Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Stephens, G.R. (1971) The relation of insect defoliation to mortality
in Connecticut forests. Connecticut Agricultural Experimental Station
Bulletin , 723, 1–16.
Stephens, P.A. & Sutherland, W.J. (1999) Consequences of the Allee
effect for behaviour, ecology and conservation. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution , 14, 401–405.
Stephens, P.A., Frey-Roos, F., Arnold, W. & Sutherland, W.J. (2002)
Sustainable exploitation of social species: a test and comparisonof models. Journal of Applied Ecoloogy , 39, 629–642.
Sterner, R.W., Bajpai, A. & Adams, T. (1997a) The enigma of food
chain length: absence of theoretical evidence for dynamic con-straints. Ecology , 78, 2258–2262.
Sterner, R.W., Elser, J.J., Fee, E.J., Guildford, S.J. & Chrzanowski, T.H.
(1997b) The light : nutrient ratio in lakes: the balance of energyand materials affects ecosystem structure and processes. American
Naturalist , 150, 663–684.
Stevens, C.E. & Hume, I.D. (1998) Contributions of microbes in 
vertebrate gastrointestinal tract to production and conservationof nutrients. Physiological Reviews , 78, 393–426.
Stewart, T.W., Miner, J.G. & Lowe, R.L. (1998) Macroinvertebrate
communities on hard substrates in western Lake Erie: structur-ing effects of Dreissena . Journal of Great Lakes Research , 24,
868–879.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 693694 REFERENCES
Stoll, P. & Prati, D. (2001) Intraspeciﬁc aggregation alters com-
petitive interactions in experimental plant communities. Ecology ,
82, 319–327.
Stoll, P., Weiner, J., Muller-Landau, H., Muller, E. & Hara, T. (2002)
Size symmetry of competition alters biomass–density relationships.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 269, 2191–2195.
Stone, G.M. & Cook, J.M. (1998) The structure of cynipid oak galls:
patterns in the evolution of an extended phenotype. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 265, 979–988.
Stone, L. & Roberts, A. (1990) The checkerboard score and species
distributions. Oecologia , 85, 74–79.
Stolp, H. (1988) Microbial Ecology . Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Storch, D., Sizling, A.L. & Gaston, K.J. (2003) Geometry of the species
area relationship in central European birds: testing the mechanism.
Journal of Animal Ecology , 72, 509–519.
Storey, K.B. (1990) Biochemical adaptation for cold hardiness in
insects. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 
Series B , 326, 635–654; also in Life at Low Temperatures (R.M. Laws
& F. Franks, eds), pp. 119–138. The Royal Society, London.
Stowe, L.G. & Teeri, J.A. (1978) The geographic distribution of 
C4species of the Dicotyledonae in relation to climate. American
Naturalist , 112, 609–623.
Strauss, S.Y. & Agrawal, A.A. (1999) The ecology and evolution of plant
tolerance to herbivory. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 14, 179–185.
Strauss, S.Y., Irwin, R.E. & Lambrix, V.M. (2004) Optimal defence
theory and ﬂower petal colour predict variation in the secondary
chemistry of wild radish. Journal of Ecology , 92, 132–141.
Strauss, S.Y., Rudgers, J.A., Lau, J.A. & Irwin, R.E. (2002) Direct and
ecological costs of resistance to herbivory. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 17, 278–285.
Strobeck, C. (1973) N species competition. Ecology , 54, 650–654.
Stromberg, P.C., Toussant, M.J. & Dubey, J.P. (1978) Population 
biology of Paragonimus kellicotti metacercariae in central Ohio.
Parasitology , 77, 13–18.
Strong, D.R. Jr. (1982) Harmonious coexistence of hispine bettles on
Heliconia in experimental and natural communities. Ecology , 63,
1039–1049.
Strong, D.R. (1992) Are trophic cascades all wet? Differentiation and
donor-control in speciose ecosystems. Ecology , 73, 747–754.
Strong, D.R. Jr., Lawton, J.H. & Southwood, T.R.E. (1984) Insects 
on Plants: community patterns and mechanisms . Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, Oxford.
Suchanek, T.H. (1992) Extreme biodiversity in the marine environ-
ment: mussel bed communities of Mytilus californianus. Northwest
Environmental Journal , 8, 150.
Summerhayes, V.S. & Elton, C.S. (1923) Contributions to the ecology
of Spitsbergen and Bear Island. Journal of Ecology , 11, 214–286.
Sunderland, K.D., Hassall, M. & Sutton, S.L. (1976) The population
dynamics of Philoscia muscorum (Crustacea, Oniscoidea) in a dune
grassland ecosystem. Journal of Animal Ecology , 45, 487–506.
Susarla, S., Medina, V.F. & McCutcheon, S.C. (2002) Phytoremedia-
tion: an ecological solution to organic chemical contamination.
Ecological Engineering , 18, 647–658.Sutherland, W.J. (1983) Aggregation and the ‘ideal free’ distribution.
Journal of Animal Ecology , 52, 821–828.
Sutherland, W.J. (1998) The importance of behavioural studies in 
conservation biology. Animal Behaviour , 56, 801–809.
Sutherland, W.J., Gill, J.A. & Norris, K. (2002) Density-dependent 
dispersal in animals: concepts, evidence, mechanisms and con-sequences. In: Dispersal Ecology ( J.M. Bullock, R.E. Kenward & 
R.S. Hails, eds), pp. 134–151. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Sutton, M.A., Pitcairn, C.E.R. & Fowler, D. (1993) The exchange 
of ammonia between the atmosphere and plant communities.Advances in Ecological Research , 24, 302–393.
Sutton, S.L. & Collins, N.M. (1991) Insects and tropical forest conserva-
tion. In: The Conservation of Insects and their Habitats (N.M. Collins
& J.A. Thomas, eds), pp. 405–424. Academic Press, London.
Swift, M.J., Heal, O.W. & Anderson, J.M. (1979) Decomposition in
Terrestrial Ecosystems . Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Symonides, E. (1979) The structure and population dynamics of
psammophytes on inland dunes. II. Loose-sod populations. Ekologia
Polska , 27, 191–234.
Symonides, E. (1983) Population size regulation as a result of intra-
population interactions. I. The effect of density on the survival
and development of individuals of Erophila verna (L.). Ecologia Polska ,
31, 839–881.
Syms, C. & Jones, G.P. (2000) Disturbance, habitat structure, and the
dynamics of a coral-reef ﬁsh community. Ecology , 81, 2714–2729.
Szarek, S.R., Johnson, H.B. & Ting, I.P. (1973) Drought adaption 
in Opuntia basilaris . Signiﬁcance of recycling carbon through
Crassulacean acid metabolism. Plant Physiology , 52, 539–541.
Tamm, C.O. (1956) Further observations on the survival and ﬂower-
ing of some perennial herbs. Oikos , 7, 274–292.
Tanaka, M.O. & Magalhaes, C.A. (2002) Edge effects and succession
dynamics in Brachidontes mussel beds. Marine Ecology Progress Series ,
237, 151–158.
Taniguchi, H., Nakano, S. & Tokeshi, M. (2003) Habitat complexity,
patch size and the abundance of ephiphytic invertebrates on plants.
Freshwater Biology , 00, 00–00.
Taniguchi, Y. & Nakano, S. (2000) Condition-speciﬁc competition: 
implications for the altitudinal distribution of stream ﬁshes. Ecology ,
81, 2027–2039.
Tansley, A.G. (1917) On competition between Galium sylvestre 
Poll. ( G. asperum Schreb.) on different types of soil. Journal of Ecology ,
5, 173–179.
Tansley, A.G. (1939) The British Islands and their Vegetation . Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Taylor, A.D. (1993) Heterogeneity in host–parasitoid interactions: the
CV2rule. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 8, 400–405.
Taylor, I. (1994) Barn Owls. Predator–Prey Relationships and Conserva-
tion. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Taylor, L.R. (1987) Objective and experiment in long-term research.
In: Long-Term Studies in Ecology (G.E. Likens, ed.), pp. 20–70.
Springer-Verlag, New York.
Taylor, R.B., Sotka, E. & Hay, M.E. (2002) Tissue-speciﬁc induction
of herbivore resistance: seaweed response to amphipod grazing.Oecologia , 132, 68–76.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 694REFERENCES 695
Teeri, J.A. & Stowe, L.G. (1976) Climatic patterns and the distribution
of C4grasses in North America. Oecologia , 23, 112.
Teirney, L.D. (2003) Fiordland Marine Conservation Strategy: Te
Kaupapa Atawhai o Te Moana o Atawhenua . Guardians of Fiordland’s
Fisheries and Marine Environment Inc., Te Anau, New Zealand.
Téllez-Valdés, O. & Dávila-Aranda, P. (2003) Protected areas and 
climate change: a case study of the cacti in the Tehuacán-Cuicatlán
Biosphere Reserve, Mexico. Conservation Biology , 17, 846–853.
Ter Braak, C.J.F. & Prentice, I.C. (1988) A theory of gradient analysis.
Advances in Ecological Research , 18, 272–317.
Ter Braak, C.J.F. & Smilauer, P. (1998) CANOCO for Windows 
version 4.02. Wageningen, the Netherlands.
Terborgh, J. (1973) On the notion of favorableness in plant ecology.
American Naturalist , 107, 481–501.
Teuschl, Y., Taborsky, B. & Taborsky, M. (1998) How do cuckoos
ﬁnd their nests? The role of habitat imprinting. Animal Behaviour ,
56, 1425–1433.
Thomas, C.D. (1990) What do real population dynamics tell us
about minimum viable population sizes? Conservation Biology , 4,
324–327.
Thomas, C.D. & Harrison, S. (1992) Spatial dynamics of a patchily
distributed butterﬂy species. Journal of Applied Ecology , 61, 437–446.
Thomas, C.D. & Jones, T.M. (1993) Partial recovery of a skipper 
butterﬂy ( Hesperia comma ) from population refuges: lessons for 
conservation in a fragmented landscape. Journal of Animal Ecology ,
62, 472–481.
Thomas, C.D., Thomas, J.A. & Warren, M.S. (1992) Distributions of
occupied and vacant butterﬂy habitats in fragmented landscapes.
Oecologia , 92, 563–567.
Thomas, F. & Poulin, R. (1998) Manipulation of a mollusc by a troph-
ically transmitted parasite: convergent evolution of phylogeneticinheritance? Parasitology , 116, 431–436.
Thomas, S.C. & Weiner, J. (1989) Growth, death and size distribu-
tion change in an Impatiens pallida population. Journal of Ecology ,
77, 524–536.
Thompson, D.J. (1975) Towards a predator–prey model incorporating
age-structure: the effects of predator and prey size on the pre-dation of Daphnia magna by Ischnura elegans. Journal of Animal Ecology ,
44, 907–916.
Thompson, D.J. (1989) Sexual size dimorphism in the damselﬂy
Coenagrion puella (L.). Advances in Ódonatology , 4, 123–131.
Thompson, J.N. (1988) Evolutionary ecology of the relationship
between oviposition preference and performance of offspring in phytophagous insects. Entomologia Experimentia et Applicata , 
47, 3–14.
Thompson, J.N. (1995) The Coevolutionary Process . University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Thompson, R.M. & Townsend, C.R. (2000) Is resolution the solution?:
the effect of taxonomic resolution on the calculated properties ofthree stream food webs. Freshwater Biology , 44, 413–422.
Thompson, R.M., Mouritsen, K.N. & Poulin, R. (2005) Import-
ance of parasites and their life cycle characteristics in deter-
mining the structure of a large marine food web. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 74, 77–85.Thompson, R.M., Townsend, C.R., Craw, D., Frew, R. & Riley, R.
(2001) (Further) links from rocks to plants. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution , 16, 543.
Thórhallsdóttir, T.E. (1990) The dynamics of ﬁve grasses and white
clover in a simulated mosaic sward. Journal of Ecology , 78, 909–923.
Tillman, P.G. (1996) Functional response of Microplitis croceipes and
Cardiochiles nigriceps (Hymenoptera: Braconidae) to variation in
density of tobacco budworm (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae). 
Environ-
mental Entomology , 25, 524–528.
Tilman, D. (1977) Resource competition between planktonic algae:
an experimental and theoretical approach. Ecology , 58, 338–348.
Tilman, D. (1982) Resource Competition and Community Structure .
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Tilman, D. (1986) Resources, competition and the dynamics of plant
communities. In: Plant Ecology (M.J. Crawley, ed.), pp. 51–74.
Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Tilman, D. (1987) Secondary succession and the pattern of plant 
dominance along experimental nitrogen gradients. Ecological Mono-
graphs , 57, 189–214.
Tilman, D. (1988) Plant Strategies and the Dynamics and Structure of Plant
Communities . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Tilman, D. (1990) Mechanisms of plant competition for nutrients: the
elements of a predictive theory of competition. In: Perspectives on
Plant Competition ( J.B. Grace & D. Tilman, eds), pp. 117–141.
Academic Press, New York.
Tilman, D. (1996) Biodiversity: population versus ecosystem stability.
Ecology , 77, 350–363.
Tilman, D. (1999) The ecological consequences of changes in bio-
diversity: a search for general principles. Ecology , 80, 1455–1474.
Tilman, D. & Wedin, D. (1991a) Plant traits and resource reduction
for ﬁve grasses growing on a nitrogen gradient. Ecology , 72,
685–700.
Tilman, D. & Wedin, D. (1991b) Dynamics of nitrogen competition
between successional grasses. Ecology , 72, 1038–1049.
Tilman, D., Fargione, J., Wolff, B. et al. (2001) Forecasting agricul-
turally driven global environmental change. Science , 292, 281–284.
Tilman, D., Mattson, M. & Langer, S. (1981) Competition and 
nutrient kinetics along a temperature gradient: an experimental
test of a mechanistic approach to niche theory. Limnology and
Oceanography , 26, 1020–1033.
Tilman, D., Reich, P.B., Knops, J., Wedin, D., Meilke, T. & Lehman,
C. (2001) Diversity and productivity in a long-term grasslandexperiment. Science , 294, 843–845.
Timmermann, A., Oberhuber, J., Bacher, A., Esch, M., Latif, M. &
Roeckner, E. (1999) Increased El Niño frequency in a climate modelforced by future greenhouse warming. Nature , 398, 694–697.
Timmins, S.M. & Braithwaite, H. (2002) Early detection of new
invasive weeds on islands. In: Turning the Tide: eradication of 
invasive species (D. Veitch & M. Clout, eds), pp. 311–318. Invasive
Species Specialist Group of the World Conservation Union(IUCN), Auckland, New Zealand.
Tinbergen, L. (1960) The natural control of insects in pinewoods. 
1: factors inﬂuencing the intensity of predation by songbirds.Archives néerlandaises de Zoologie , 13, 266–336.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 695696 REFERENCES
Tjallingii, W.F. & Hogen Esch, Th. (1993) Fine structure of aphid
stylet routes in plant tissues in correlation with EPG signals.
Physiological Entomology , 18, 317–328.
Tkadlec, E. & Stenseth, N.C. (2001) A new geographical gradient 
in vole population dynamics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London, Series B , 268, 1547–1552.
Toft, C.A. & Karter, A.J. (1990) Parasite–host coevolution. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution , 5, 326–329.
Tokeshi, M. (1993) Species abundance patterns and community
structure. Advances in Ecological Research , 24, 112–186.
Tompkins, D.M. & Begon, M. (1999) Parasites can regulate wildlife
populations. Parasitology Today , 15, 311–313.
Tompkins, D.M., White, A.R., Boots, M. (2003) Ecological replace-
ment of native red squirrels by invasive greys driven by disease.
Ecology Letters , 6, 189–196.
Tonn, W.M. & Magnuson, J.J. (1982) Patterns in the species com-
position and richness of ﬁsh assemblages in northern Wisconsinlakes. Ecology , 63, 137–154.
Towne, E.G. (2000) Prairie vegetation and soil nutrient responses to
ungulate carcasses. Oecologia , 122, 232–239.
Townsend, C.R. (1991) Community organisation in marine and 
freshwater environments. In: Fundamentals of Aquatic Ecology (R.S.K.
Barnes & K.H. Mann, eds), pp. 125–144. Blackwell ScientiﬁcPublications, Oxford.
Townsend, C.R. (1996) Concepts in river ecology: pattern and 
process in the catchment hierarchy. Archiv fur Hydrobiologie , 113
(Suppl. 10), 3–21.
Townsend, C.R. (2003) Individual, population, community and eco-
system consequences of a ﬁsh invader in New Zealand streams.Conservation Biology , 17, 38–47.
Townsend, C.R. & Hildrew, A.G. (1980) Foraging in a patchy 
environment by a predatory net-spinning caddis larva: a test ofoptimal foraging theory. Oecologia , 47, 219–221.
Townsend, C.R. & Hildrew, A.G. (1994) Species traits in relation 
to a habitat templet for river systems. Freshwater Biology , 31,
265–275.
Townsend, C.R., Hildrew, A.G. & Francis, J.E. (1983) Community
structure in some southern English streams: the inﬂuence ofphysiochemical factors. Freshwater Biology , 13, 521–544.
Townsend, C.R., Scarsbrook, M.R. & Dolédec, S. (1997) The inter-
mediate disturbance hypothesis, refugia and bio-diversity in streams.Limnology and Oceanography , 42, 938–949.
Townsend, C.R., Thompson, R.M., Macintosh, A.R., Kilroy, C.,
Edwards, E. & Scarsbrook, M.R. (1998) Disturbance, resource supply and food-web architecture in streams. Ecology Letters , 1,
200–209.
Townsend, C.R., Tipa, G., Teirney, L.D. & Niyogi, D.K. (2004)
Development of a tool to facilitate participation of Maori in themanagement of stream and river health. Ecology and Health , 1,
184–195.
Townsend, C.R., Winﬁeld, I.J., Peirson, G. & Cryer, M. (1986) The
response of young roach Rutilus rutilus to seasonal changes in 
abundance of microcrustacean prey: a ﬁeld demonstration ofswitching. Oikos , 46, 372–378.Tracy, C.R. (1976) A model of the dynamic exchanges of water 
and energy between a terrestrial amphibian and its environment.
Ecological Monographs , 46, 293–326.
Tregenza, T. (1995) Building on the ideal free distribution. Advances
in Ecological Research , 26, 253–307.
Trewavas, A. (2001) Urban myths of organic farming: organic 
agriculture began as an idealogy, but can it meet today’s needs?
Nature , 410, 409–410.
Trewick, S.A. & Worthy, T.H. (2001) Origins and prehistoric ecology
of takahe based on morphometric, molecular, and fossil data. 
In: The Takahe: ﬁfty years of conservation management and research
(W.G. Lee & I.G. Jamieson, eds), pp. 31–48. University of OtagoPress, Dunedin, New Zealand.
Trexler, J.C., McCulloch, C.E. & Travis, J. (1988) How can the func-
tional response best be determined? Oecologia , 76, 206–214.
Tripet, F. & Richner, H. (1999) Density dependent processes in the
population dynamics of a bird ectoparasite Ceratophyllus gallinae .
Ecology , 80, 1267–1277.
Turchin, P.D. (1990) Rarity of density dependence or population 
regulation with lags? Nature , 344, 660–663.
Turchin, P. (2003) Complex Population Dynamics . Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.
Turchin, P. & Batzli, G.O. (2001) Availability of food and the popula-
tion dynamics of arvicoline rodents. Ecology , 82, 1521–1534.
Turchin, P. & Berryman, A.A. (2000) Detecting cycles and delayed
density dependence: a comment on Hunter and Price (1998).Ecological Entomology , 25, 119–121.
Turchin, P. & Hanski, I. (1997) An empirically based model for 
latitudinal gradient in vole population dynamics. American
Naturalist , 149, 842–874.
Turchin, P. & Hanski, I. (2001) Contrasting alternative hypotheses
about rodent cycles by translating them into parameterized models. Ecology Letters , 4, 267–276.
Turesson, G. (1922a) The species and variety as ecological units.
Hereditas , 3, 100–113.
Turesson, G. (1922b) The genotypical response of the plant species
to the habitat. Hereditas , 3, 211–350.
Turkington, R. & Harper, J.L. (1979) The growth, distribution and
neighbour relationships of Trifolium repens in a permanent pasture.
IV. Fine scale biotic differentiation. Journal of Ecology , 67,
245–254.
Turkington, R. & Mehrhoff, L.A. (1990) The role of competition in
structuring pasture communities. In: Perspectives on Plant Competi-
tion( J.B. Grace & D. Tilman, eds), pp. 307–340. Academic Press,
New York.
Turner, J.R.G., Lennon, J.J. & Greenwood, J.J.D. (1996) Does climate
cause the global biodiversity gradient? In: Aspects of the Genesis and
Maintenance of Biological Diversity (M. Hochberg, J. Claubert & R.
Barbault, eds), pp. 199–220. Oxford University Press, London andNew York.
Twigg, L.E., Martin, G.R. & Lowe, T.J. (2002) Evidence of pesticide
resistance in medium-sized mammalian pests: a case study with1080 poison and Australian rabbits. Journal of Applied Ecology , 39,
549–560.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 696REFERENCES 697
Tyndale-Biscoe, M. & Vogt, W.G. (1996) Population status of the 
bush ﬂy, Musca vetustissima (Diptera: Muscidae), and native dung
beetles (Coleoptera: Scarabaeninae) in south-eastern Australia 
in relation to establishment of exotic dung beetles. Bulletin of
Entomological Research , 86, 183–192.
Uchmanski, J. (1985) Differentiation and frequency distributions of
body weights in plants and animals. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London, Series B , 310, 1–75.
Umbanhowar, J., Maron, J. & Harrison, S. (2003) Density dependent
foraging behaviors in a parasitoid lead to density dependent 
parasitism of its host. Oecologia , 137, 123–130.
UNEP (2003) Global Environmental Outlook Year Book 2003 . United
Nations Environmental Program, GEO Section, PO Box 30552,
Nairobi, Kenya.
United Nations (1999) The World at Six Billion . United Nations Popula-
tion Division, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United
Nations Secretariat, New York.
US Department of the Interior (1990) Audit Report: the Endangered Species
Program . US Fish and Wildlife Service Report 90–98.
Usio, N. & Townsend, C.R. (2001) The signiﬁcance of the crayﬁsh
Paranephrops zealandicus as shredders in a New Zealand head-
water stream. Journal of Crustacean Biology , 21, 354–359.
Usio, N. & Townsend, C.R. (2002) Functional signiﬁcance of crayﬁsh
in stream food webs: roles of omnivory, substrate heterogeneityand sex. Oikos , 98, 512–522.
Usio, N. & Townsend, C.R. (2004) Roles of crayﬁsh: consequences
of predation and bioturbation for stream invertebrates. Ecology ,
85, 807–822.
Valentine, J.W. (1970) How many marine invertebrate fossil species?
A new approximation. Journal of Paleontology , 44, 410–415.
Valladares, V.F. & Pearcy, R.W. (1998) The functional ecology of shoot
architecture in sun and shade plants of Heteromeles arbutifolia M.
Roem., a Californian chaparral shrub. Oecologia , 114, 1–10.
Van Breeman, N. (2002) Natural organic tendency. Nature , 415, 381–382.
van de Koppel, J., Rietkerk, M. & Weissing, F.J. (1997) Catastrophic
vegetation shifts and soil degredation in terrestrial grazing systems.Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 12, 352–356.
van den Bosch, R., Leigh, T.F., Falcon, L.A., Stern, V.M., Gonzales,
D. & Hagen, K.S. (1971) The developing program of integratedcontrol of cotton pests in California. In: Biological Control
(C.B. Huffaker, ed.), pp. 377–394. Plenum Press, New York.
Van der Juegd, H.P. (1999) Life history decisions in a changing environ-
ment: a long-term study of a temperate barnacle goose population . PhD
thesis, Uppsala University, Uppsala.
van Leneteren, J.C. & Woets, J. (1988) Biological and integrated pest
control in greenhouses. Annual Review of Entomology , 33, 239–269.
van Rensburg, B.J., Chown, S.L. & Gaston, K.J. (2002) Species 
richness, environmental correlates, and spatial scale: a test usingSouth African birds. American Naturalist , 159, 566–577.
van Riper, C., van Riper, S.G., Goff, M.L. & Laird, M. (1986) The
epizootiology and ecological signiﬁcance of malaria in Hawaiian
land birds. Ecological Monographs , 56, 327–344.
Vandenkoornhuyse, P., Ridgway, K.P., Watson, I.J., Fitter, A.H. &
Young, J.P.W. (2003) Co-existing grass species have distinctive arbuscular mycorrhizal communities. Molecular Ecology , 12, 3085–
3095.
Vander Zanden, M.J., Shuter, B.J., Lester, L. & Rasmussen, J.B.
(1999) Patterns of food chain length in lakes: a stable isotope study.
American Naturalist , 154, 406–416.
Vandermeest, D.B., Van Lear, D.H. & Clinton, B.D. (2002) American
chestnut as an allelopath in the southern Appalachians. Forest 
Ecology and Management , 165, 173–181.
Vanderplank, J.E. (1963) Plant Diseases: epidemics and control .
Academic Press, New York.
Varley, G.C. (1947) The natural control of population balance in the
knapweed gall-ﬂy ( Urophora jaceana ). Journal of Animal Ecology , 16,
139–187.
Varley, G.C. & Gradwell, G.R. (1968) Population models for the 
winter moth. Symposium of the Royal Entomological Society of London ,
9, 132–142.
Varley, G.C. & Gradwell, G.R. (1970) Recent advances in insect 
population dynamics. Annual Review of Entomology , 15, 1–24.
Vaughan, N., Lucas, E.-A, Harris, S. & White, P.C.L. (2003) Habitat
associations of European hares Lepus europaeus in England and
Wales: implications for farmland management. Journal of Applied
Ecology , 40, 163–175.
Vázquez, G.J.A. & Givnish, T.J. (1998) Altitudinal gradients in trop-
ical forest composition, structure, and diversity in the Sierra de
Manantlán. Journal of Ecology , 86, 999–1020.
Venterink, H.O., Wassen, M.J., Verkroost, A.W.M. & de Ruiter, P.C.
(2003) Species richness–productivity patterns differ between 
N-, P- and K-limited wetlands. Ecology , 84, 2191–2199.
Verhulst, P.F. (1838) Notice sur la loi que la population suit dans 
son accroissement. Correspondances Mathématiques et Physiques ,
10, 113–121.
Villa, F., Tunesi, L. & Agardy, T. (2002) Zoning marine protected areas
through spatial multiple-criteria analysis: the case of the AsinaraIsland National Marine Reserve of Italy. Conservation Biology , 16,
515–526.
Vivas-Martinez, S., Basanez, M.-G., Botto, C. et al. (2000) Amazonian
onchocerciasis: parasitological proﬁles by host-age, sex, andendemicity in southern Venezuela. Parasitology , 121, 513–525.
Volk, M., Niklaus, P.A. & Korner, C. (2000) Soil moisture effects 
determine CO
2responses of grassland species. Oecologia , 125,
380–388.
Volterra, V. (1926) Variations and ﬂuctuations of the numbers of 
individuals in animal species living together. (Reprinted in 1931.
In: R.N. Chapman, Animal Ecology . McGraw Hill, New York.)
Vos, M., Hemerik, L. & Vet, L.E.M. (1998) Patch exploitation by 
the parasitoids Cotesia rubecula and Cotesia glomerata in multi-patch
environments with different host distributions. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 67, 774–783.
Vucetich, J.A., Peterson, R.O. & Schaefer, C.L. (2002) The effect 
of prey and predator densities on wolf predation. Ecology , 83,
3003–3013.
Waage, J.K. & Greathead, D.J. (1988) Biological control: challenges
and opportunities. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, Series B , 318, 111–128.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 697698 REFERENCES
Wallace, J.B. & O’Hop, J. (1985) Life on a fast pad: waterlily leaf 
beetle impact on water lilies. Ecology , 66, 1534–1544.
Wallis, G.P. (1994) Population genetics and conservation in New
Zealand: a hierarchical synthesis and recommendations for the
1990s. Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand , 24, 143–160.
Walsh, J.A. (1983) Selective primary health care: strategies for con-
trol of disease in the developing world. IV. Measles. Reviews of
Infectious Diseases , 5, 330–340.
Walter, D.E. (1987) Trophic behaviour of ‘mycophagous’ micro-
arthropods. Ecology , 68, 226–228.
Walther, G.-R., Post, E., Convey, P. et al. (2002) Ecological responses
to recent climate change. Nature , 416, 389–395.
Wang, G.-H. (2002) Plant traits and soil chemical variables during 
a secondary vegetation succession in abandoned ﬁelds on the
Loess Plateau. Acta Botanica Sinica , 44, 990–998.
Ward, J.V. (1988) Riverine–wetland interactions. In: Freshwater Wetlands
and Wildlife (R.R. Sharitz & J.W. Gibbon, eds), pp. 385–400.
Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Information, US Departmentof Energy, Oak Ridge, TN.
Wardle, D.A., Bonner, K.I. & Barker, G.M. (2000) Stability of eco-
system properties in response to above-ground functional grouprichness and composition. Oikos , 89, 11–23.
Ware, G.W. (1983) Pesticides Theory and Application . W.H. Freeman,
New York.
Waring, R.H. & Schlesinger, W.H. (1985) Forest Ecosystems: concepts
and management . Academic Press, Orlando, FL.
Warren, P.H. (1989) Spatial and temporal variation in the structure
of a freshwater food web. Oikos , 55, 299–311.
Warren, P.H. (1994) Making connections in food webs. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution , 9, 136–141.
Warren, R.S., Fell, P.E., Rozsa, R. et al. (2002) Salt marsh restoration
in Connecticut: 20 years of science and management. Restoration
Ecology , 10, 497–513.
Waser, N.M. & Price, M.V. (1994) Crossing distance effects in
Delphinium nelsonii : outbreeding and inbreeding depression in
progeny ﬁtness. Evolution , 48, 842–852.
Waterhouse, D.F. (1974) The biological control of dung. Scientiﬁc
American , 230, 100–108.
Watkinson, A.R. (1984) Yield–density relationships: the inﬂuence of
resource availability on growth and self-thinning in populationsof Vulpia fasciculata. Annals of Botany , 53, 469–482.
Watkinson, A.R. & Harper, J.L. (1978) The demography of a sand
dune annual: Vulpia fasciculata . I. The natural regulation of 
populations. Journal of Ecology , 66, 15–33.
Watkinson, A.R., Freckleton, R.P., Robinson, R.A. & Sutherland, W.J.
(2000) Predictions of biodiversity response to genetically modiﬁedherbicide-tolerant crops. Science , 289, 1554–1557.
Watson, A. & Moss, R. (1980) Advances in our understanding of the
population dynamics of red grouse from a recent ﬂuctuation innumbers. Areda , 68, 103–111.
Watt, A.S. (1947) Pattern and process in the plant community.
Journal of Ecology , 35, 1–22.
Way, M.J. & Cammell, M. (1970) Aggregation behaviour in relation
to food utilization by aphids. In: Animal Populations in Relation to their Food Resource (A. Watson, ed.), pp. 229–247. Blackwell
Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
Weathers, K.C., Caldenasso, M.L. & Pickett, S.T.A. (2001) Forest 
edges as nutrient and pollutant concentrators: potential synergisms
between fragmentation, forest canopies and the atmosphere.Conservation Biology , 15, 1506–1514.
Weaver, J.E. & Albertson, F.W. (1943) Resurvey of grasses, forbs 
and underground plant parts at the end of the great drought.
Ecological Monographs , 13, 63–117.
Webb, S.D. (1987) Community patterns in extinct terrestrial inverteb-
rates. In: Organization of Communities: past and present ( J.H.R. Gee
& P.S. Giller, eds), pp. 439–468. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications,
Oxford.
Webb, W.L., Lauenroth, W.K., Szarek, S.R. & Kinerson, R.S. (1983)
Primary production and abiotic controls in forests, grasslands
and desert ecosystems in the United States. Ecology , 64, 134–151.
Webster, J. (1970) Introduction to Fungi . Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Webster, M.S. & Almany, G.R. (2002) Positive indirect effects in a
coral reef ﬁsh community. Ecology Letters , 5, 549–557.
Wegener, A. (1915) Entstehung der Kontinenter und Ozeaner . Samml.
Viewig, Braunschweig. English translation (1924) The Origins of 
Continents and Oceans . Translated by J.G.A. Skerl. Metheun,
London.
Weiner, J. (1986) How competition for light and nutrients affects 
size variability in Ipomoea tricolor populations. Ecology , 67, 1425–
1427.
Weiner, J. (1990) Asymmetric competition in plant populations.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 5, 360–364.
Weiner, J. & Thomas, S.C. (1986) Size variability and competition in
plant monocultures. Oikos , 47, 211–222.
Weller, D.E. (1987) A reevaluation of the −3/2 power rule of plant
self-thinning. Ecological Monographs , 57, 23–43.
Weller, D.E. (1990) Will the real self-thinning rule please stand up?
A reply to Osawa and Sugita. Ecology , 71, 1204–1207.
Werner, E.E., Gilliam, J.F., Hall, D.J. & Mittlebach, G.G. (1983a) 
An experimental test of the effects of predation risk on habitatuse in ﬁsh. Ecology , 64, 1540–1550.
Werner, E.E., Mittlebach, G.G., Hall, D.J. & Gilliam, J.F. (1983b)
Experimental tests of optimal habitat use in ﬁsh: the role of relative habitat proﬁtability. Ecology , 64, 1525–1539.
Werner, H.H. & Hall, D.J. (1974) Optimal foraging and the size selec-
tion of prey by the bluegill sunﬁsh Lepomis macrohirus . Ecology , 55,
1042–1052.
Werner, P.A. & Platt, W.J. (1976) Ecological relationships of co-
occurring golden rods ( Solidago : Compositae). American Naturalist ,
110, 959–971.
Wertheim, B., Sevenster, J.G., Eijs, I.E.M & van Alphen, J.J.M.
(2000) Species diversity in a mycophagous insect community: thecase of spatial aggregation vs. resource partitioning. Journal of Animal
Ecology , 69, 335–351.
Wesson, G. & Wareing, P.F. (1969) The induction of light sensitiv-
ity in weed seeds by burial. Journal of Experimental Biology , 20,
413–425.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 698REFERENCES 699
West, G.B., Brown, J.H. & Enquist, B.J. (1997) A general model 
for the origin of allometric scaling laws in biology. Science , 276,
122–126.
West, H.M., Fitter, A.H. & Watkinson, A.R. (1993) Response of Vulpia
ciliata ssp. ambigua to removal of mycorrhizal infection and to 
phosphate application under natural conditions. Journal of Ecology ,
81, 351–358.
Westphal, M.I., Pickett, M., Getz, W.M. & Possingham, H.P. (2003)
The use of stochastic dynamic programming in optimal landscape
reconstruction for metapopulations. Ecological Applications , 13,
543–555.
Wharton, D.A. (2002) Life at the Limits: organisms in extreme environ-
ments . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
White, J. (1980) Demographic factors in populations of plants. In:
Demography and Evolution in Plant Populations (O.T. Solbrig, ed.),
pp. 21–48. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.
White, T.C.R. (1993) The Inadequate Environment: nitrogen and the 
abundance of animals . Springer, Berlin.
Whittaker, R.H. (1953) A consideration of climax theory: the climax
as a population and pattern, Ecological Monographs , 23, 41–78
Whittaker, R.H. (1956) Vegetation of the Great Smoky Mountains.
Ecological Monographs , 23, 41–78.
Whittaker, R.H. (1975) Communities and Ecosystems , 2nd edn.
Macmillan, London.
Whittaker, R.J., Willis, K.J. & Field, R. (2003) Climatic–energetic 
explanations of diversity: a macroscopic perspective. In: Macro-
ecology: concepts and consequences (T.M. Blackburn & K.J. Gaston,
eds), pp. 107–129. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Wiebes, J.T. (1979) Coevolution of ﬁgs and their insect pollinators.
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics , 10, 1–12.
Wiens, J.A., Stenseth, N.C., Van Horne, B. & Ims, R.A. (1993) 
Ecological mechanisms and landscape ecology. Oikos , 66,
369–380.
Wilbur, H.M. (1987) Regulation of structure in complex systems: 
experimental temporary pond communities. Ecology , 68, 1437–
1452.
Wilby, A., Shachak, M. & Boeken, B. (2001) Integration of eco-
system engineering and trophic effects of herbivores. Oikos , 92,
436–444.
Williams, G.C. (1966) Adaptation and Natural Selection . Princeton
University Press, Princetion, NJ.
Williams, K.S., Smith, K.G. & Stephen, F.M. (1993) Emergence of 
13-year periodical cicadas (Cicacidae: Magicicada ): phenology,
mortality and predator satiation. Ecology , 74, 1143–1152.
Williams, W.D. (1988) Limnological imbalances: an antipodean view-
point. Freshwater Biology , 20, 407–420.
Williamson, M.H. (1972) The Analysis of Biological Populations . Edward
Arnold, London.
Williamson, M.H. (1981) Island Populations . Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Williamson, M. (1999) Invasions. Ecography , 22, 5–12.
Wilson, D.S. (1986) Adaptive indirect effects. In: Community Ecology
( J. Diamond & T.J. Case, eds), pp. 437–444. Harper & Row, NewYork.Wilson, E.O. (1961) The nature of the taxon cycle in the Melanesian
ant fauna. American Naturalist , 95, 169–193.
Wilson, J.B. (1987) Methods for detecting non-randomness in species
co-occurrences: a contribution. Oecologia , 73, 579–582.
Wilson, J.B. (1988a) Shoot competition and root competition.
Journal of Applied Ecology , 25, 279–296.
Wilson, J.B. (1988b) Community structure in the ﬂora of islands in
Lake Manapouri, New Zealand. Journal of Ecology , 76, 1030–1042.
Wilson, J.B. (1999) Guilds, functional types and ecological groups. 
Oikos , 86, 507–522.
Wilson, J.B. & Agnew, A.D. (1992) Positive-feedback switches in 
plant communities. Advances in Ecological Research , 23, 263–333.
Wilson, K., Bjørnstad, O.N., Dobson, A.P. et al. (2002) Hetero-
geneities in macroparasite infections: patterns and processes. In: The Ecology of Wildlife Diseases (P.J. Hudson, A. Rizzoli, B.T.
Grenfell, H. Heesterbeek & A.P. Dobson, eds), pp. 6–44. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Wilson, S.D. & Tilman, D. (2002) Quadratic variation in old-ﬁeld 
species richness along gradients of disturbance and nitrogen.
Ecology , 83, 492–504.
Winemiller, K.O. (1990) Spatial and temporal variation in tropical ﬁsh
trophic networks. Ecological Monographs , 60, 331–367.
Winemiller, K. (1996) Factors driving temporal and spatial variation
in aquatic ﬂoodplain food webs. In: Food Webs: integration of patterns
and dynamics (G.A. Polis & K.O. Winemiller, eds), pp. 298–312.
Chapman & Hall, New York.
Winterbourn, M.J. & Townsend, C.R. (1991) Streams and rivers: 
one- way ﬂow systems. In: Fundamentals of Aquatic Ecology (R.S.K.
Barnes & K.H. Mann, eds), pp. 230–244. Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, Oxford.
With, K.A., Pavuk, D.M., Worchuck, J.L., Oates, R.K. & Fisher, J.L.
(2002) Threshold effects of landscape structure on biological con-trol in agroecosystems. Ecological Applications , 12, 52–65.
Wittenberg, R. & Cock, M.J.W. (2001) Invasive Alien Species: a toolkit of
best prevention and management practices . CAB International, Oxford.
Woiwod, I.P. & Hanski, I. (1992) Patterns of density dependence in
moths and aphids. Journal of Animal Ecology , 61, 619–629.
Wolda, H. (1978) Fluctuations in abundance of tropical insects.
American Naturalist , 112, 1017–1045.
Wolday, D., Mayaan, S., Mariam, Z.G. et al. (2002) Treatment of 
intestinal worms is associated with decreased HIV plasma viralload. Journal of Acquired Immune Deﬁciency Syndromes , 31, 56–62.
Wolff, J.O. (1997) Population regulation in mammals: an evolution-
ary perspective. Journal of Animal Ecology , 66, 1–13.
Wolff, J.O. (2003) Density-dependence and the socioecology of
space use in rodents. In: Rats, Mice and People: rodent biology and
management (G.R. Singleton, L.A. Hynds, C.J. Krebs & D.J. Spratt,
eds), pp. 124–130. Australian Centre for International Agricul-tural Research, Canberra.
Wolff, J.O., Schauber, E.M. & Edge, W.D. (1997) Effects of habitat
loss and fragmentation on the behavior and demography of gray-tailed voles. Conservation Biology , 11, 945–956.
Woodward, F.I. (1987) Climate and Plant Distribution . Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
•• ••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 699700 REFERENCES
Woodward, F.I. (1990) The impact of low temperatures in controlling
the geographical distribution of plants. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London, Series B , 326, 585–593; also in Life at
Low Temperatures (R.M. Laws & F. Franks, eds), pp. 69–77. The
Royal Society, London.
Woodward, F.I. (1994) Predictions and measurements of the maximum
photosynthetic rate, Amax, at the global scale. In: Ecophysiology:
photosynthesis (E.D. Schulze & M.M. Caldwell, eds), pp. 491–509.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Woodward, G. & Hildrew, A.G. (2002) Body-size determinants of 
niche overlap and intraguild predation within a complex food web.
Journal of Animal Ecology , 71, 1063–1074.
Woodwell, G.M., Whittaker, R.H. & Houghton, R.A. (1975) Nutrient
concentrations in plants in the Brookhaven oak pine forest. Ecology ,
56, 318–322.
Wootton, J.T. (1992) Indirect effects, prey susceptibility, and habitat
selection: impacts of birds on limpets and algae. Ecology , 73,
981–991.
Worland, M.R. & Convey, P. (2001) Rapid cold hardening in Antarctic
microarthropods. Functional Ecology , 15, 515–524.
Worm, B. & Duffy, J.E. (2003) Biodiversity, productivity and stability
in real food webs. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 18, 628–632.
Worrall, J.W., Anagnost, S.E. & Zabel, R.A. (1997) Comparison of
wood decay among diverse lignicolous fungi. Mycologia , 89,
199–219.
Worthen, W.B. & McGuire, T.R. (1988) A criticism of the aggregation
model of coexistence: non-independent distribution of dipteranspecies on ephemeral resources. American Naturalist , 131, 453–458.
Worthington, E.B. (ed.) (1975) Evolution of I.B.P. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Wurtsbaugh, W.A. (1992) Food-web modiﬁcation by an invertebrate
predator in the Great Salt Lake (USA). Oecologia , 89, 168–175.
Wynne-Edwards, V.C. (1962) Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social
Behaviour . Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh.
Yako, L.A., Mather, M.E. & Juanes, F. (2002) Mechanisms for 
migration of anadromous herring: an ecological basis for effect-ive conservation. Ecological Applications , 12, 521–534.
Yameogo, L., Crosa, G., Samman, J. et al. (2001) Long-term assessment
of insecticide treatments in West Africa: aquatic entomofauna.Chemosphere , 44, 1759–1773.
Yao, I., Shibao, H. & Akimoto, S. (2000) Costs and beneﬁts of ant
attendance to the drepanosiphid aphid Tuberculatus quercicola .
Oikos , 89, 3–10.
Yazvenko, S.B. & Rapport, D.J. (1997) The history of Ponderosa pine
pathology: implications for management. Journal of Forestry , 95,
16–20.
Yibarbuk, D., Whitehead, P.J., Russell-Smith, J. et al. (2001) Fire
ecology and aboriginal land management in central ArnhemLand, northern Australia: a tradition of ecosystem management.Journal of Biogeography , 28, 325–343.Yoda, K., Kira, T., Ogawa, H. & Hozumi, K. (1963) Self thinning in
overcrowded pure stands under cultivated and natural conditions.
Journal of Biology, Osaka City University , 14, 107–129.
Yodzis, P. (1986) Competiton, mortality and community structure.
In: Community Ecology ( J. Diamond & T.J. Case, eds), pp. 480–491.
Harper & Row, New York.
Yoshida, T., Jones, L.E., Ellner, S.P., Fussmann, G.F. & Hairston, 
N.G. Jr. (2003) Rapid evolution drives ecological dynamics in a 
predator–prey system. Nature , 424, 303–306.
Young, R.G., Huryn, A.D. & Townsend, C.R. (1994) Effects of 
agricultural development on processing of tussock leaf litter in high country New Zealand streams. Freshwater Biology , 32,
413–428.
Young, T.P. (1990) Evolution of semelparity in Mount Kenya lobelias.
Evolutionary Ecology
, 4, 157–172.
Young, T.P. & Augspurger, C.K. (1991) Ecology and evolution of 
long-lived semelparous plants. Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 6,
285–289.
Yu, L.M. (1995) Elicitins from Phytophthora and basic resistance in
tobacco. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the USA ,
92, 4088–4094.
Zadoks, J.S. & Schein, R.D. (1979) Epidemiology and Disease Manage-
ment . Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Zahn, R. (1994) Fast ﬂickers in the tropics. Nature (London) , 372,
621–622.
Zak, D.R., Holmes, W.E., White, D.C., Peacock, A.D. & Tilman, D.
(2003) Plant diversity, soil microbial communities, and ecosystem
function: are there any links? Ecology , 84, 2042–2050.
Zavala, J.A., Paankar, A.G., Gase, K. & Baldwin, I.T. (2004) Con-
stitutive and inducible trypsin proteinase inhibitor production
incurs large ﬁtness costs in Nicotinia attenuata . Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA , 101, 1607–1612.
Zavaleta, E.S., Hobbs, R.J. & Mooney, H.A. (2001) Viewing invasive
species removal in a whole-ecosystem context. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution , 16, 454–459.
Zeide, B. (1987) Analysis of the 3/2 power law of self-thinning. Forest
Science , 33, 517–537.
Zheng, D., Prince, S. & Wright, R. (2003) Terrestrial net primary 
production estimates in 0.5 degree grid cells from ﬁeld observa-tions – a contribution to global biogeochemical modelling. Global
Change Biology , 9, 46–64.
Zheng, D.W., Bengtsson, J. & Agren, G.I. (1997) Soil food webs and
ecosystem processes: decomposition in donor-control and Lotka–Volterra systems. American Naturalist , 145, 125–148.
Ziemba, R.E. & Collins, J.P. (1999) Development of size structure in
tiger salamanders: the role of intraspeciﬁc interference. Oecologia ,
120, 524–529.
Zimmer, M. & Topp, W. (2002) The role of coprophagy in nutrient
release from feces of phytophagous insects. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry , 34, 1093–1099.
••EIPD01  10/24/05  1:37 PM  Page 700••Page numbers in italic refer to ﬁgures; those
in bold to tables
abalones (Haliotidae), 640
Abies
lasiocarpa (subalpine ﬁr), 505
religiosa (oyamel), 192
Acacia , 68, 166, 385
cornigera (Bull’s horn acacia), 383, 383
drepanolobium , 385, 385
nilotic subsp. indica (spiny acacia), 220–1,
221
Acari, 330, 331
Accipiter
gentilis (goshawk), 208
nisus (sparrowhawk), 113
Acer (maple)
campestre ,65
rubrum , 481
saccharum (sugar maple), 485
Achillea mellefolium , 194
Acmaea scutum (plate limpet), 280
Acomys
cahirinus , 259
russatus , 259
Aconitum spp., 389
acorn barnacles, 595
Acromyrmex , 386
Actinocyclus normanii , 537
Actinomyces scabies , 351
actinomycetes, 40, 328
Actitis macularia (spotted sandpiper),
638
Acyrthosiphon pisum (pea aphid), 175, 175,
463
Adelina triboli ,372Aedes
aegypti , 219, 220, 220
albopictus , 219, 220, 220
Aepyornis (elephant bird), 627
African dung beetle ( Heliocopris dilloni ), 341,
342
African elephant ( Loxodonta africana ),
214–16, 215, 216
African ground squirrel, 86Agelaius phoeniceus (red-winged blackbird),
638
Ageneottix deorum ,275, 275
Agrobacterium tumefaciens , 354
agromyzid ﬂies, 354
Agropyron repens , 260, 261
Agrostis
capillaris cv ‘Goginan’, 188
capillaris cv ‘Parys’, 188
scabra , 260, 261
stolonifera (creeping bent grass), 7, 7, 242
Ailuropoda melanoleuca (giant panda), 202,
202, 207, 571
Aira praecox , 243, 244
Alabama leafworm, 444
Alaria marginata , 566
Alauda arvensis (skylark), 444, 445
albatross, 126Alces alces (moose), 105, 304, 305, 571
alder ( Alnus spp.), 340, 402, 403, 480, 480,
528, 637
Aleurotrachelus jelinekii (viburnum whiteﬂy),
322, 323
algae, 5, 49, 50, 63, 65, 75, 169, 240, 241,
381, 395–7, 483, 491, 502, 512, 513,568, 581, 584, 595, 640, 641,
Alissum bertolonii , 187Allium spp., 440
almond moth ( Ephestia cautella ),144
Alnus (alder), 402, 403, 528
glutinosa , 340
japonica , 637
sieboldiana ,480, 480
Alopecurus aequalis , 637
Alopex lagopus (arctic fox), 343
Alosa
aestivalis , 197
pseudoharengus , 197, 642
alpine marmot ( Marmota marmota ), 453–4
Altica sublicata (ﬂea beetle), 271, 272
Amaranthus retroﬂexus (redroot pigweed),
249
Amblyomma limbatum , 362
Amblyseius californicus , 33, 34
Ambrosia
artemisiifolia , 486
psilostachya ,77
ambrosia beetles, 335, 
336, 338, 386
Ambystoma
opacum ,128, 129
tigrinum ,128, 129
tigrinum nebulosum , 153
American beech ( Fagus grandifolia ), 486
American chestnut ( Castanea dentata ), 233,
571
American eel ( Anguilla rostrata ), 170
American elk ( Cervus elaphus ), 169
American pika ( Ochotona princeps ), 183–4,
184
Ammophila breviligulata (dune grass), 481, 481
amoeba, 329amphibians, 47, 169, 607, 615, 626
amphipods, 199, 288, 576, 642Organism indexEIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 701702 ORGANISM INDEX
Amphiprion (anemone ﬁsh), 383, 553–4, 555
leucokranos , 553–4
percula , 553
perideraion , 553
sandaracinos , 553
Anabaenopsis arnoldii ,4 8
Anaphes victus , 291, 292
Anatopynia pennipes , 596
anchovies, 455
Andricus ,355
Andropogon gerardi , 260, 261, 497
Androsace septentrionalis ,144, 411, 412, 417,
418
Aneilema keisak , 637
anemone ﬁsh ( Amphiprion spp.), 383,
553–4, 555
Anemone hepatica , 153, 155
angiosperms, 626, 627
Anguilla
anguilla (European eel), 170
rostrata (American eel), 170
Anisopteromalus calandrae ,317
Anolis ,561, 561, 562, 572
gingivinus , 363
occultus , 561
sagrei , 570
wattsi , 363
Anopheles annulipes , 379
Anser erythropus (lesser white-fronted goose),
201
Antarctic seals, 28, 28
anther smut fungus ( Ustilago violacea ), 368,
370
Anthoceros , 404
Anthonomus grandis (boll weevil), 444
Anthoxanthum odoratum (sweet vernal grass),
188
ants, 221, 222, 266, 272, 329, 338, 383,
385–6, 394, 575, 581, 604, 605, 606, 607
anurans, 259Aonidiella aurantii (California red scale),
320, 321
Aphelinus thomsoni ,309
aphids, 79, 80, 80, 164
, 175, 266, 268, 288,
349, 385–6, 394, 395, 448, 462–3
Aphis fabae ,164
Aphytis mellitus , 320, 321
Apion ulicis , 297
Apogon fragilis (cardinal ﬁsh), 570
Aponomma hydrosuari , 362
apple thrip ( Thrips imaginis ), 414
apples, 449, 449
Aquilegia , 389
Arabidopsis thaliana ,160, 160Arabis fecunda (sapphire rockcress), 5, 6
Archaea, 407archaebacteria, 40, 47, 58, 401, 407Archocentrus nigrofasciatus (convict cichlid),
155, 156
arctic fox ( Alopex lagopus ), 343
arctic tern ( Sterna paradisaea ), 169
Arctostaphylos , 403
Ardea cinerea (heron), 323, 324
Argoporis apicalis , 342
Aristida purpurea ,77
Arizona pocket mouse ( Perognathus amplus ),
287
armadillo, 86Armillaria mellea (honey fungus), 357
Artemia ,281, 282
franciscana (brine shrimp), 580
Artemisia , 246–7
gmelinii , 482
scoparia , 482
Arthrinium , 328, 329
arthropods, 47Arvicola terrestris (water vole), 180
ascidians, 92Asclepias sp. (milkweed), 85
Ascomorpha ovalis ,476, 477
Ascomycetes, 328, 396, 398Ascophyllum nodosum , 268, 269, 577
Asellus (isopod), 332
aspen ( Populus ), 22
Aspergillus fumigatus ,4 0
Asphodelus ramosus ,278, 278
aspic viper ( Vipera aspis ), 113, 114
Aspidiotiphagus citrinus ,
288
Asplanchna priodonta ,8 3
Asterionella formosa , 230–1, 231, 237, 263, 265
asteroids, 625
Astraea undosa , 245, 247
Atlantic salmon ( Salmo salar ), 170
Atropa belladonna (deadly nightshade), 566
Atta, 386
cephalotes , 386, 387
colombica , 386
vollenweideri ,387
Attamyces bromatiﬁcus , 386
Austrovenus stutchburyi , 572
Avicennia germinans (black mangrove), 493
Azolla , 404
Azorhizobium , 402
Azotobacteria, 402
Bacillus
anthracis , 361
thuringiensis , 448, 450backswimmer ( Notonecta hoffmanni ), 285
bacteria, 40, 59, 79, 255, 256, 257, 326,
327–9, 331, 333, 354, 379, 379, 380,
402, 407, 527, 530, 546, 618
badgers, 310, 343
Bailey’s pocket mouse ( Perognathus baileyi ),
287
Balanus
balanoides , 227–9, 229, 232, 233, 238
glandula , 107, 108, 568
bamboo, 97, 202bandicoot, 196bank vole ( Clethrionomys glareolus ), 123, 358
barberry ( Berberis vulgaris ), 349
barley, 385barn owl ( Tyto alba ), 287
barnacle goose ( Branta leucopsis ),169, 201
barnacles, 5, 50, 107, 108, 133, 161, 227–9,
229, 232, 233, 238, 491, 568
barndoor skate ( Dipturus laevis ),198
Bashania fargesii , 202
Basidiomycetes, 328, 398bats, 389, 390, 615Battus philenor , 570
bean ( Phaseolus lunatus ), 318
beavers, 585bed bugs, 394
bedstraw ( Gallium
sp.), 229, 231
beech ( Fagus spp.), 328–9, 329, 470, 483, 618
bees, 35
beet army worm ( Spodoptera exigua ),443,
444
beetles, 24, 113, 115, 196, 203, 233, 238–9,
239, 259, 271, 279, 291, 329, 330, 335,
335, 342, 344, 344–5, 372, 386, 394, 448,
556, 570, 581, 596, 615
Belding’s grounds quirrel ( Spermophilus
beldingi ), 175
Belostoma ﬂumineum , 584
Berberis vulgaris (barberry), 349
bettongs, 196
Betula (birch), 22, 166
nana (dwarf birch), 556
pendula (silver birch), 137, 137
pubescens ,4 1
bighorn sheep, 210, 210
bilbies, 196birch ( Betula spp.), 22, 41, 137, 137, 166,
483, 556
bird louse, 351birds, 35, 83, 85, 102, 110, 122–3, 125–6,
127, 128, 165, 169–70, 176, 195, 203,208, 210–11, 230, 238, 283–4, 310, 339,343, 350, 350–1, 352, 415, 487, 488,
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 702ORGANISM INDEX 703
493, 559–60, 569, 569, 570, 571, 580,
604, 606, 607, 612, 615, 618, 619, 620,
620, 621, 625, 625, 639, 639
bison ( Bos bison ), 489, 496
Bison bison (wood bison), 307
Biston betularia (peppered moth), 7, 8, 8–9, 9
bivalves, 245, 247
black bear ( Ursos americanus ), 284
black cherry ( Prunus serotina ), 360
black-legged tick ( Ixodes scapularis ), 640
black long-snouted weevil ( Cyrtobagous
spp.), 423, 423
black mangrove ( Avicennia germinans ), 493
black stem rust, 349
blackﬂy ( Simulium spp.), 169, 349, 446
blackgum, 483blackwater herring ( Clupea harengus ),140
Blarina (shrew), 309
Blasia , 404
Blastophaga psenes (ﬁg wasp), 390
blowﬂy ( Lucilia ), 343
blue-green algae, 527, 536blue jay ( Cyanocitta cristata ), 85, 86
blue tit ( Parus caeruleus ), 230
bluebell ( Hyacinthoides non-scripta ), 399
bluebottle ﬂy ( Calliphora vomitoria ),309
bluegill sunﬁsh ( Lepomis macrochirus ), 284,
286, 286, 287
Bodo saltans , 329
Boiga irregularis , 571
boll weevil ( Anthonomus grandis ), 444
Borrelia burdorferi , 639
Bos
bison (bison), 489, 496
taurus , 566
taurus indicus (zebu cow), 566
Bosmina sp., 197, 199
Bothriochloa
insculpta , 566
ischaemun , 482
Botrytis
cinerea , 326
fabi, 351
Bouteloua gracilis ,77, 533
Brachidontes
darminius , 493
solisianus , 493
brachiopods, 560, 560
Brachysira vitea , 52, 53
Bracionus calyciﬂorus ,298
bracken fern ( Pteridium aquilinum ), 84, 166,
552
Bradyrhizobium , 402
Branta leucopsis (barnacle goose), 169, 201Brassica napus ,270, 270
Brassicaceae, 270Bremia lactucae (downy mildew), 363
Brevicoryne brassicae (cabbage aphid), 288,
311
brine shrimps ( Artemia spp.), 164, 580
Bromus
madritensis , 240–1, 241
rigidus , 240–1, 241
brook stickleback ( Culaea inconstans ),253,
253
brown bear ( Ursos arctos ), 284
brown-headed cowbird ( Molothrus ater ), 572
brown lemming ( Lemmus sibiricus ), 437
brown trout ( Salmo trutta ),139, 139, 140,
190, 286, 581, 640
bryozoans, 92, 101, 233, 381Buchloe dactyloides ,77
Buchnera , 394, 395
buckeye butterﬂy ( Junonia coenia ),73
buffalo ﬂy ( Haematobia irritans exigua ), 342
Bufo
calamita (natterjack toad), 233
woodhousii , 259
Bull’s horn acacia ( Acacia cornigera ), 383,
383
bumblebees, 35, 559
bushﬂy ( Musca vetustissima ), 342
Butorides striatus ,621
butterﬂies, 221, 385, 570, 615
buzzard, 310
cabbage aphid ( Brevicoryne brassicae ),288,
311
cabbage looper ( Trichoplusia ni ),443, 444
cacti, 24, 32, 37, 40, 222, 222
caddis-ﬂies, 287–8, 289, 332, 571–2, 572, 572,
573
Cakile edentula , 177, 179
Calathea ovandensis , 178
Calidris , 576
canutus (knot), 169, 170
California mouse ( Peromyscus californicus ),
174
California red scale ( Aonidiella aurantii ),
320, 321
Californian mussel ( Mytilus californianus ),
580
Calliphora vomitoria (bluebottle ﬂy), 309
calliphorid ﬂies, 343
Callitris intratropica , 635
Callosobruchus
chinensis ,317
maculatus , 113, 115Calochortus , 204
Calycomyza sp., 246
Camarhynchus
pallida (woodpecker ﬁnch), 13
psottacula , 11, 13
Canadian lynx ( Lynx canadensis ),298, 303,
426, 426, 427
Canadian pondweed ( Elodea canadensis ), 166
Canis lupus (wolf ), 304, 305
Capra pyrenaica (Spanish ibex), 233
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse),
145, 243, 243
Capsodes infuscatus ,278, 278
Carcharhinus leucas , 196
Carcinus
aestuarii , 304, 305
maenas ,280
Cardamine
cordifolia , 272
hirsuta ,243, 243
Cardiaspina albitextura (eucalyptus psyllid),
322, 323
cardinal ﬁsh ( Apogon fragilis ), 570
Carduus , 448, 580
nutans (nodding thistle), 274, 419
Carex , 585
arenaria (sand sedge), 93, 93, 171
atherodes ,307
bigelowii , 104, 106, 556
caribou ( Rangifer tarandus ), 170, 280, 453
Carnegiea gigantea (saguaro cactus), 45
carrot ( Daucus carrota ), 141, 143
Caryedes brasiliensis ,8 5
Cassia obtusifolia (sicklepod), 249
cassowary, 16, 16
Castanea dentata (chestnut), 17, 18, 233, 
571
Castanopsis sieboldii ,480, 480
Casuarina (she-oak), 403
cats, 310, 579cattail ( Typha ), 124, 126, 233
cattle, 266, 280, 392, 566, 639cauliﬂower mosaic virus, 349cave beetle ( Neapheanops tellkampﬁ ),133,
133
Ceanothus , 403
cecidomyid wasps, 354Centaurea solstitalis (yellow star thistle), 190
Cephalopholis boenak , 570
Ceratocystis picea , 335
Ceratophyllus gallinae ,356
Cerocebus galeritus (Tana River crested
mangabey), 213
Certhidea olivacea (warbler ﬁnch), 11, 13
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 703704 ORGANISM INDEX
Cervus
elaphus , 102, 103, 103, 103, 104, 104, 169,
421, 421–2
elaphus scoticus , 194
Chalcophaps stephani ,621
Chalcosoma
atlas , 253, 254
caucasus , 253, 254
Chama arcana , 245, 247
Chamaecrista fasciculata , 5, 6
cheetah, 275, 276
Chen caerulescens caerulescens (lesser snow
goose), 585
Chenopodium album (fat hen), 92, 172, 444,
635
chestnut ( Castanea dentata ), 17, 18, 571
chestnut blight ( Cryphonectria parasitica ), 233
Chionochloa , 194
pallens (tussock grass), 276, 277
chironomids, 287, 289
Chironomus lugubris , 340–1
chitons, 566, 568, 595
Chlorella , 395
pyrenoidos ,65
vulgaris ,62, 62, 298
cholera bacterium ( Vibrio cholerae ), 199
Chorthippus brunneus ,139, 139, 171
Chrysomelidae, 556
Chrysopidae, 448Chthamalus
ﬁssus , 491
stelatus , 227–9, 229, 232, 233, 238
Chydorus sphaericus , 340–1
cichlids, 119, 120, 621
ciliates, 539cinnebar moth, 79Cirsium , 580
canescens (platte thistle), 448
ovalatum , 577
Cistothorus palustris (marsh wren), 638
citricola scale ( Coccus pseudomagnoliarum ),
447
cladocerans, 199Cladochytrium replicatum ,328
Cladophora , 581
Clamator glandarius
(great spotted cuckoo),
350
Claviceps , 396
Clavicipitaceae, 396
Clavicularia , 404
cleaner ﬁsh ( Labroides dimidiatus ),382, 383
Clethrionomys , 433
glareolus (bank vole), 123, 358
rufocanus , 433Clostridium spp., 402
clouded yellow ( Colias croceus ), 170
clown ﬁsh ( Amphiprion ), 383
Clupea harengus (blackwater herring), 140
clupeids, 455
Cnidaria, 395coal tit ( Parus ater ), 230, 569
coastal redwood ( Sequoia sempervirens ), 159
Coccinella septempunctata ,288
coccinellid beetles, 266Coccoloba uvifera (seagrape), 582
Coccus pseudomagnoliarum (citricola scale),
447
cockles, 572, 573, 574, 575
cockroaches, 97, 337, 338, 394cod ( Gadus morhua ), 41, 44, 152, 153, 457,
458
Coenagrion puella ,111
Coffea
arabica ,4 5
robusta ,4 5
coffee ( Coffea ), 45
Coleomegilla maculata , 463, 463, 464
Coleophora alticolella (rush moth), 46
Colias croceus (clouded yellow), 170
collared lemming ( Dicrostonyx groenlandicus ),
435
Collembola (springtails), 330, 331, 339, 339
Colleoptera seebeetles
Collisella subrugosa , 493
Colorado pikeminnow ( Ptychocheilus lucius ),
189
Colorado potato beetle ( Leptinotarsa
decemlineata ),33, 177, 178, 415,
415–16, 416
, 417
Columba
livia (rock dove), 363
palumbus (woodpigeon), 168, 274
common frog ( Rana temporaria ), 233
common skate ( Dipturus batis ),198
common vole ( Microtus arvalis ), 433
Connochaetes taurinus (wildebeest), 141, 278,
279
Conochilus unicornis ,476, 477
convict cichlid ( Archocentrus nigrofasciatus ),
155, 156
copepods, 537
corals, 92, 92, 93, 102, 327, 382, 604
Coregonus artedi ,643
corn ( Zea mays ), 37, 234, 234, 385, 634, 634
Corophium volutator ,288, 576
Cortaderia selloana (pampas grass), 450
Cotesia glomerata , 293
cotton ( Gossypium hirsutum ), 448cotton aphid, 444
cotton bollworm ( Heliothis zea ),443, 444
cottongrass ( Eriophorum vaginatum ), 556
cottony cushion-scale insect ( Icerya
purchasi ), 297, 447
Cougourdella ,572, 572
cowbird, 350cowpox, 358crab-eater seal ( Lobodon carcinophagus ),28,
28
crabs, 5, 169, 304, 305
cranberry ( Vaccinium vitis-idaea ), 556
Crangon septemspinosa (sand shrimp), 31, 32
Crassulaceae, 71crayﬁsh ( Orconectes rusticus ),362
creeping bent grass ( Agrostis stolonifera ),7,
7, 242
Crematogaster
mimosae , 385
nigriceps , 385
sjostedti , 385
Crenicichla alta , 119, 120
crested tit ( Parus cristatus ), 569
Crisia eburnea ,484
Crocuta crocuta (hyena), 343
crossleaved gentian ( Gentiana cruciata ), 272,
386
crows, 310, 343crustaceans, 78, 332, 340, 345, 537Cryphonectria parasitica (chestnut blight),
233
Cryptadius tarsalis , 342
Cryptochaetum , 447
Cryptopygus antarcticus ,39
cuckoo ( Cuculus canorum ),350, 351
cuckoo-dove ( Macropygia spp.), 559, 561
Cuculus canorum (cuckoo), 350, 351
Culaea inconstans (brook stickleback), 253,
253
Cupressus (cypress), 166
Curtuteria australis , 572, 574
Cuscuta (dodder), 350
salina , 363, 364
cyanobacteria, 48, 400, 401, 404Cyanocitta cristata (blue jay), 85, 86
Cyathermia naticoides , 569
cycads, 404Cyclotella meneghiniana , 263, 265
Cymbella perpusilla , 52, 53
cynipid wasps, 354Cynodon dactylon , 566
Cynomys spp. (prairie dog), 86, 352
Cynosurus cristatus , 242
cypress ( Cupressus ), 166
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 704ORGANISM INDEX 705
Cyrtobagous spp. (black long-snouted
weevil), 423, 423
damselﬂies, 111, 307
Danaus plexippus (monarch butterﬂy), 85,
86, 192, 192–3, 193
dandelion ( Taraxacum ofﬁcinale ), 119, 120
Daphnia ,307
galeata mendotae , 643
magna ,136, 307, 307
pulicaria , 643, 643
Dasypus novemcinctus (nine-banded
armadillo), 653
Daucus carrota (carrot), 141, 143
deadly nightshade ( Atropa belladonna ), 566
decapods, 625
deer mouse ( Peromyscus ),309
Deinacrida mahoenuiensis (weta), 638
Deleatidium spp. (mayﬂy), 640
Delia radicum ,288
Delphinium nelsonii (larkspur), 173, 173
Dendroctonus frontalis (southern pine beetle),
136
Dendroica kirtlandii (Kirtland’s warbler), 572
dermestid beetles, 344
desert honeysweet ( Tidestromia oblongifolia ),
40
Desulfotomaculum spp., 402
dewberries, 268diatoms, 51–2, 53, 75, 230–1, 231, 237, 264,
328, 537, 539
Dicerorhinus sumatrensis (Sumatran
rhinoceros), 211
Dicrostonyx (lemming), 343, 433
groenlandicus (collared lemming), 435
Dictyoptera, 338Didelphis virginiana (oppossum), 86
Dinorthidae (moas), 627Dioclea metacarpa ,8 5
Diplopoda (millipedes), 330Dipodomys (kangaroo rat), 352
merriami (Merriam’s kangaroo rat), 287
spectabilis ,174, 174
Dipsacus sylvestris , 178
Diptera, 242, 266, 267, 330, 553Dipturus
batis (common skate), 198
laevis (barndoor skate), 198
oxyrhinchus (long-nose skate), 198
Distichlis spicata , 638
Ditylenchus , 329
dodder ( Cuscuta spp.), 350, 363, 364
Dolly Varden charr ( Salvelinus malma ), 46,
47, 227, 228, 238dolphins, 78Douglas ﬁr ( Pseudotsuga menziesii ), 112, 114
downy mildew ( Bremia lactucae ), 363
Dreissena polymorpha (zebra mussel), 190,
199–200, 201
Drepanosiphum platanoidis (sycamore aphid),
309
Drosophila , 13, 14, 113, 116, 339, 620
adiastola ,1 3
busckii , 339, 340
hydei , 339
immigrans , 339
melanogaster ,114, 121, 144, 339
nebulosa ,255
obscura , 171
recens , 356, 357
serrata ,255
setosimentum ,1 3
simulans , 339
Dryas , 403
octopetala ,4 5
duckbill platypus ( Ornithorynchus anatinus ),
19
ducks, 350duckweed ( Lemna sp.), 50, 90, 92, 166
dune grass ( Ammophila breviligulata ),481, 481
dwarf birch ( Betula nana ), 556
eagles, 266earthworms, 47, 330, 331, 332, 575earwig ( Forﬁcula spp.), 268
eastern chipmunk ( Tamias striatus ),36
Echinogammarus ischnus
, 642
Ectyoplasia ferox ,274, 274
Egretta thula (snowy egret), 638
Eichhornia (water hyacinth), 92, 166
paniculata , 182, 182
elephant bird ( Aepyornis ), 627
elephants, 83, 129, 391, 487
Elimia clavaeformis , 516, 517
elk, 453
elm, 271Elodea canadensis (Canadian pondweed), 166
Elytrigia repens , 635
emus, 16, 16
Encarsia formosa , 448
Encephalartos , 404
Enchytraeidae (pot worms), 330, 331Endothia parasitica , 571
Engraulis ringens (Peruvian anchovy), 452,
452, 455
Enhydra lutris (sea otter), 640, 641
Entamoeba histolytica , 349
Enterobacteriacea, 402Eotetranychus sexmaculatus ,317
Epacridaceae, 398Ephestia
cautella (almond moth), 144
kuehniella , 245, 246
Epiblema scudderiana (goldenrod gall moth),
38
Epichloe , 396
typhona , 354
Ericaceae (heathers), 397Eriophorum vaginatum (cottongrass), 556
Erithacus rubecula (robin), 169
Erodium cicutarium , 243, 244
Erophila verna , 101
Escovopsis , 386
Esox lucius (northern pike), 643
Eubacteria, 407Eucalyptus (gum tree), 5, 25, 173, 275, 280
eucalyptus psyllid ( Cardiaspina albitextura ),
322, 323
Eupomacentrus apicalis , 495
European eel ( Anguilla anguilla ), 170
European hare ( Lepus aeropaeus ),188, 188
European rabbit ( Oryctolagus cuniculus ), 378,
446, 566
Eutermes , 338
Euura lasiolepis (sawﬂy), 430
Fagus
crenata , 328–9, 329
grandifolia (American beech), 486
sylvatica , 340
fairy shrimps, 101
Falco tinnunculus (kestrel), 125, 126, 310
false pink bollworm, 444
Fargesia spathacea , 202
fat hen ( Chenopodium album ), 92, 172, 444,
635
ferns, 75, 404, 422, 423, 620
Festuca rubra , 194
cv ‘Merlin’, 188
Ficedula hypoleuca (pied ﬂycatcher), 362–3
Ficus (ﬁg), 97, 390
carica , 390
ﬁeld gentian ( Gentiana campestris ),273, 273
ﬁeld vole ( Microtus agrestis ), 433, 434
ﬁfteen-spined stickleback ( Spinachia
spinachia ), 282
ﬁg (Ficus ), 24, 97, 390
ﬁg wasp ( Blastophaga psenes ), 390
ﬁnches, 350
ﬁshes, 5, 78, 189, 196, 197, 199, 205, 495,
537, 570, 581, 599, 604, 621, 625, 638,
643
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 705706 ORGANISM INDEX
ﬂagellates, 539
ﬂamingo ( Phoeniconaias minor ), 536
ﬂatworm ( Paragonimus kellicotti ),362
ﬂax ( Linum usitatissimum ), 151, 152
ﬂea beetles, 270, 270, 271, 272
ﬂeas, 349, 356
ﬂies, 266, 618
Florida manatee ( Trichechus manatus ), 653
Florinia externa ,288
ﬂour beetles ( Tribolium spp.), 134, 135, 372
ﬂycatcher ( Monarcha cinerascens ),621
ﬂying squirrel ( Pteromys volans ), 197–9, 200
forbs, 194, 195
Forﬁcula spp. (earwig), 268
Formica yessensis (red wood ant), 385
fox ( Vulpes vulpes ), 83, 188
Fragaria (strawberry), 91
Fragilaria virescens , 52, 53
Frankia , 402, 403–4
frogs, 241, 575
fruit-ﬂies ( Drosophila spp.), 13, 14, 113, 114,
116, 121, 144, 171, 255, 339, 340, 356,
357, 620
Frustulia rhomboides , 52, 53
Fucus spiralis ,5 0
fulmars, 126Fundulus heteroclitus (mummichog), 537
fungi, 40, 79, 92, 326, 327–9, 328, 329, 332,
335, 343, 349, 354, 357, 382, 571, 618
Fungi Imperfecti, 328Fusarium oxysporum ,369
Gadus morhua (cod), 41, 44, 152, 153, 457,
458
Galaxias spp., 640, 641
Gallium (bedstraw), 229, 231, 238
hercynicum , 229, 238
pumilum , 229, 238
Gammarus
,281, 282, 332
Gasterosteus aculeatus (three-spined
stickleback), 252
gastropods, 85, 245, 247, 450, 569, 612, 640
geckos, 260
Gentiana
campestris (ﬁeld gentian), 273, 273
cruciata (crossleaved gentian), 272, 385
Gentianella germanica , 207, 208
Geocoris pallens , 269
Geospiza
fortis , 11, 516, 517, 523
fuliginosa ,1 1
scandens ,1 1
Gerbillus allenbyi , 251
gerbils, 251giant ground sloth, 627
giant panda ( Ailuropoda melanoleuca ),202,
202, 207, 571
giant rhinoceros beetle ( Chalcosoma ), 253,
254
Gigartina canaliculata , 491
Glanville fritillary ( Melitaea cinxia ),181, 181,
183, 183
Glaucidium passerinum (pigmy owl), 569,
569
glaucous-winged gull ( Larus glaucescens ),
580
Glomeromycota, 398Glomus , 399, 399, 400
Glossina spp. (tsetse ﬂy), 349, 393
Glossoma nigrior (caddis-ﬂy), 571–2, 572, 
573
gluttons, 343Glycine
javanica , 248, 249, 249
max (soybean), 402, 634, 634
soja, 404, 405
goats, 639goldenrod ( Solidago ),116
goldenrod gall moth ( Epiblema scudderiana ),
38
Goniastrea aspera , 396
goose barnacle ( Pollicipes polymerus ), 580
Gordius , 354
gorse (
Ulex europaeus ), 297, 638
goshawk ( Accipiter gentilis ), 208
Gossypium hirsutum (cotton), 448
granulovirus, 348, 358, 359, 372, 373
grasses, 194, 242, 248, 260–1, 261, 262, 271
grasshoppers, 139, 139, 171, 275, 275, 570
gray-tailed voles ( Microtus canicaudus ), 176
great gerbil ( Rhombomys optimus ), 352
great spotted cuckoo ( Clamator glandarius ),
350
great tit ( Parus major ), 104, 105, 122, 155,
177, 230, 284, 291, 291, 292, 351
green peach aphid ( Myzus persicae ), 268
grey birch, 483grey squirrel ( Sciurus carolensis ), 572
Grindelia lanceolata ,9 7
ground squirrels, 305groundsel ( Senecio vulgaris ), 97
gum tree ( Eucalyptus ), 5, 25, 173, 275, 280
Gunnera , 404
guppy ( Poecilia reticulata ), 119, 120, 121,
281, 281, 282
Gymnarrhena micrantha , 175
gymnosperms, 626, 627
gypsy moth ( Lymantria dispar ), 271, 288Haematobia irritans exigua (buffalo ﬂy), 342
Haematopus
bachmani , 580
ostralegus , 155, 157
halibut, 453Haliotidae, 640Haliotus rufescens (red abalone), 640, 641
Haplopappus squarrosus , 272
hares, 286, 341, 391Harmonia axyridis , 463, 463, 464
hawk ( Henicopernis longicauda ),621
heath hen ( Tympanychus cupido cupido ), 208–9
heathers (Ericaceae), 397hedgehogs, 83, 639Heliconia , 556
Heliconius
,8 8
Heliocopris dilloni (African dung beetle), 341,
342
Heliothis zea (cotton bollworm), 443, 444
Helisoma trivolvis , 584, 585
helminth worms, 349
Helminthosporium maydis (southern corn leaf
blight), 46, 46
Hemidactylus frenatus , 260
Hemigymnus malapterus ,382, 383
hemlock, 18
Henicopernis longicauda (hawk), 621
herons, 323, 324, 411, 621
herpes virus, 366Herpestes
edwardsii ,251, 251
javanicus ,251, 251, 252
smithii ,251, 251
herring gull ( Larus argentatus ),11, 11
herrings, 455Hesperia comma (silver-spotted skipper), 184
Hesperoleucas symmetricus (roach), 581
Heteractis
crispa ,555
magniﬁca , 553, 555
Heteromeles arbutifolia ,66, 66–7, 67
heteropteran bugs, 448hickory, 167Hippophaë (sea buckthorn), 403
Hirondella , 345
Histrio pictus (sargassum ﬁsh), 85
Holcus lanatus , 93, 94, 242
holothurians, 625
Homo sapiens , 100, 101, 136, 137, 186, 186,
385, 627
homopterans, 393, 394honey fungus ( Armillaria mellea ), 357
honeyeater ( Myzomela pammelaena ),621
hookworms, 370
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 706ORGANISM INDEX 707
horses, 83, 391
house mouse ( Mus domesticus ), 411, 412
houseﬂy ( Musca domestica ), 446
Howardula aoronymphium , 357, 357
hummingbirds, 389
Hyacinthoides non-scripta (bluebell), 399, 399,
400
Hydra ,90
viridis , 395
Hydrobia
ulvae , 253, 254, 334, 576
ventrosa , 253, 254
hydroids, 91, 92, 381
Hydrurga leptonynx (leopard seal), 28, 28
hyena ( Crocuta crocuta ), 343
Hyla chrysoscelis , 241, 575, 575
Hyla crucifer , 259
Hymenolepis microstoma ,356
Hymenoptera, 267, 553
Hyphomycetes, 328, 328
Hypochrysops halyetus , 221, 222
Icerya purchasi (cottony cushion-scale
insect), 297, 447
Idotea granulosa , 268
Impatiens pallida , 152, 153
Indian meal moth ( Plodia interpunctella ),
113, 144
insects, 35, 47, 84, 89, 128, 171, 176, 266,
267, 268, 278, 278, 335, 335, 339, 350, 389,
390, 393–5, 413, 414, 447, 448, 552, 552,
553, 571, 580, 604, 615, 625, 625, 626, 627
Ipomea tricolor (morning glory), 153, 154
Ips
duplicatus , 259
typographus , 259
Ishnura elegans ,307
isopods, 47, 51, 102, 268, 330, 332, 340, 383,
615
Isoptera, 392Isotomiella minor , 339
Ixodes , 639
scapularis (black-legged tick), 640
jack pine, 18
Juncus
effusus , 637
gerardi ,141
squarrosus (rush), 46
Juniperus communis , 481
Junonia coenia (buckeye butterﬂy), 73
kakapo ( Strigops habroptilus ), 579–80
kangaroo rats ( Dipodomys spp.), 174, 174, 352kangaroos, 391, 635
Kelletia kelletii , 245, 247
kelp, 381, 566Kemp’s ridley sea turtle ( Lepidochelys kempi ),
419, 420
Keratella
cochlearis ,8 3
tecta ,476, 477
tropica ,476, 477
kestrel ( Falco tinnunculus ), 125, 126, 310
killiﬁsh ( Rivulus hartii ), 119, 120
Kirtland’s warbler ( Dendroica kirtlandii ),
572
kiwi, 16, 16
knot ( Calidris canutus ), 169, 170
koala ( Phasolarctos cinereus ), 5, 213–14, 214,
215
Labroides dimidiatus (cleaner ﬁsh), 382, 383
lacewings (Chrysopidae), 448Lactobacillus sakei ,141
Lactuca sativa (lettuce), 363, 364
ladybird beetle ( Rodolia cardinalis ), 447
lagomorphs, 83Lagopus lagopus scoticus (red grouse), 363,
373, 374, 375, 424, 429–31, 431
Laguncularia racemosa (white mangrove),
493
Lantana camara , 194, 195
larch ( Larix ), 22, 268
larch budmoth ( Zeiraphera diniana ), 268
large blue butterﬂies ( Maculinea spp.), 272,
386
largemouth bass, 286, 287
Larix (larch), 22, 268
laricina , 481
larkspur ( Delphinium nelsonii ),173, 173
Larus
argentatus (herring gull), 11, 11
fuscus (lesser black-backed gull), 10, 11,
11
glaucescens (glaucous-winged gull), 580
Lasiocampa quercus (oak eggar moth), 83
leaf-eared mouse ( Phyllotis darwini ), 428
leaf root aphid ( Pemphigus bursarius ), 363
Ledum palustre , 556
leeches, 266legumes, 248, 528, 545lemmings, 304, 343, 425, 425, 429, 433–7
Lemmus (lemming), 343, 433
sibiricus (brown lemming), 437
Lemna sp. (duckweed), 50, 90, 92, 166
lemurs, 24, 25leopard frog ( Rana pipiens ), 95leopard seal ( Hydrurga leptonynx ),28, 28
Lepetodrilus elevatus , 569
Lepidaploa tortuosa , 246
Lepidochelys kempi (Kemp’s ridley sea turtle),
420, 419
Lepidodactylus lugubris , 260
Lepidoptera, 429, 627Lepomis macrochirus (bluegill sunﬁsh), 284,
286, 286, 287
Leptasterias ,595
Leptinotarsa decemlineata (Colorado potato
beetle), 33, 177, 178, 415, 415–16, 416,
417
Leptonychotes weddellii (Weddell seal), 28, 28
Lepus
aeropaeus (European hare), 188, 188
americanus (snowshoe hare), 298, 303,
426, 426, 
427
Lespedeza davurica , 482
lesser black-backed gull ( Larus fuscus ), 10,
11, 11
lesser snow goose ( Chen caerulescens
caerulescens ), 585
lesser white-fronted goose ( Anser erythropus ),
201
lettuce ( Lactuca sativa ), 363, 364
lettuce necrotic yellow virus, 349Leucanthemum vulgare , 194
lianas, 24lice, 349, 363, 394
lichens, 21, 22, 49, 381, 400–1, 401
Limenitis archippus (viceroy butterﬂy),
85, 86
limpets, 50, 141, 142, 145, 493, 566, 568,
569, 580, 595
Linum usitatissimum (ﬂax), 151, 152
lion ( Panthera leo ), 284, 343
Listronotus oregonensis , 291, 292
Littorina ,595
littorea (periwinkle), 568
obtusata , 268, 269
liver ﬂukes, 266
liverworts, 50, 404lizards, 35, 36, 116, 116, 363, 557–8, 559,
561, 561, 562, 570, 572, 582, 622
Lobelia , 121, 122
keniensis , 121, 122
telekii , 121, 122
Lobodon carcinophagus (crab-eater seal), 28,
28
lobster, 245, 247
Loligo , 453, 454
Lolium perenne (perennial rye grass), 142,
156, 158, 242, 253–4, 255
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 707708 ORGANISM INDEX
long-nose skate ( Dipturus oxyrhinchus ),198
Lonicera japonica ,91
loose smut ( Ustilago tritici ), 352
Lottia
digitalis , 580
pelta , 580
strigatella , 580
louse ﬂy, 351
Loxodonta africana (African elephant),
214–16, 215, 216
Lucilia (blowﬂy), 343
cuprina (sheep blowﬂy), 326, 351
lycaenid butterﬂies, 385
Lygus hesperus (lygus bug), 443, 444
Lymantria dispar (gypsy moth), 271, 288
Lymnaea elodes , 241
Lynx canadensis (Canadian lynx), 298, 303,
426, 426, 427
Macaranga , 554, 556
gigantea , 554, 556
trachyphylla , 554, 556
Machilus thunbergii ,480, 480
Macropygia (cuckoo-dove), 559, 561, 562
mackinlayi , 561, 562
nigrirostris , 561, 562
Macrotermitinae, 393
Maculinea
arion , 385
rebeli , 272, 385
magpie ( Pica pica ), 350
maize ( Zea mays ), 37, 234, 234, 385, 634, 634
Malvastrum coccineum ,77
mammals, 35, 127, 129, 129, 176, 203, 339,
341, 343, 352, 352, 392, 402, 415, 604,
607, 612, 622, 626, 627
marsupial, 19–20, 21
placental, 19–20, 21
Mammestra conﬁgurata ,270, 270
mammoths, 627
Manduca sexta , 268, 269
mangroves, 49, 171, 493, 495, 495, 522, 615,
619
mantids, 555
Mantis religiosa , 555
maple ( Acer spp.), 65, 470, 481
Marmota marmota (alpine marmot), 453–4
marsh tit ( Parus palustris ), 230
marsh wren ( Cistothorus palustris ), 638
marsupials, 196, 196, 389, 391, 627
Mastomys natalensis (multimammate rat),
428, 428
mayﬂies, 286, 641
meadow goldenrod ( Solidago altissima ), 485measles virus, 266, 347, 349, 370–1Megadrili (earthworms), 330Megadyptes antipodes (yellow-eyed penguin),
207
Melampus bidentatus , 638, 639
Melilotus alba (white sweet clover), 97
Melitaea cinxia (Glanville fritillary), 181, 181,
183, 183
Melospiza melodia (song sparrow), 638
Meriones tristrami , 251
Merriam’s kangaroo rat ( Dipodomys
merriami ), 287
Mesaphorura yosii , 339
Mesodinium rubrum , 395
Metapeira datona , 570
Metridium senile ,484
mice, 129, 286Microbotryum violaceum , 387
Microplitis croceipes ,307
Micropus apus (swift), 110, 411
microsporidia, 572microtine rodents, 305, 425, 425, 433–7, 435
Microtus (voles), 433
agrestis (ﬁeld vole), 433, 434
arvalis (common vole), 433
canicaudus (gray-tailed voles), 176
townsendii (Townsend’s vole), 174, 175
midges, 78, 596milkweed ( Asclepias sp.), 85
millipedes (Diplopoda), 86, 330Minuartia uniﬂora ,259, 259
Missouri goldenrod ( Solidago missouriensis ),
172, 172
mistletoe ( Phoraradendron
spp.), 266, 350
mites, 33, 34, 165, 317, 317, 319, 327, 330,
331, 345, 349, 448, 596
moas (Dinorthidae), 627
moles, 86molluscs, 47, 330, 604Molothrus ater (brown-headed cowbird), 572
monarch butterﬂy ( Danaus plexippus ), 85,
86, 192, 192–3, 193
Monarcha cinerascens (ﬂycatcher), 621
mongooses, 251
monotremes, 19Montastraea
annularis , 396, 397
faveolata , 396
Monterey pine ( Pinus radiatus ), 510
moose ( Alces alces ),105, 304, 305, 571
Mora , 110
morning glory ( Ipomea tricolor ), 153, 154
Morone chrysops ,643
Mortierella rammanniana ,329, 329mosquitoes, 101, 219–20, 440, 596mosses, 21, 22, 50, 70, 381, 618
Motacilla alba yarrellii (pied wagtail), 280
mountain beech ( Nothofagus solandri ), 160
Mucor , 327
pusillus ,4 0
mudsnails ( Hydrobia ), 253, 254, 576
mule deer ( Odocoileus hemious ), 169, 453
multimammate rat ( Mastomys natalensis ),
428, 428
mummichog ( Fundulus heteroclitus ), 537
Mus domesticus (house mouse), 411, 412
Musca
domestica (houseﬂy), 446
vetustissima (bushﬂy), 342
Musculista senhousia (mussel), 304, 305
muskoxen, 453mussels, 5, 119, 161, 199, 240, 281, 304, 305,
492–3, 493, 494, 568
mustard ( Sinapsis alba ),270, 270, 360
Mustela erminea (stoat), 194, 310, 435, 639
mustelids, 310, 440
Mycobacterium tuberculosis , 347
Myrica (sweet gale), 402, 403
Myrmica schenkii , 385
Mytilus
californianus (Californian mussel), 240,
281, 568, 580
edulis ,280, 281, 281, 595
myxoma virus, 378, 379
Myzomela pammelaena (honeyeater), 621
Myzus persicae (green peach aphid), 268
Nasutitermitinae, 337natterjack toad ( Bufo calamita ), 233
Navicula minima ,65
Neapheanops tellkampﬁ (cave beetle), 133,
133
Necator , 370
nematodes, 47, 101, 329, 330, 331, 332, 349,
352, 354, 356, 357, 363, 373–6, 374, 375,
376, 424, 429, 571
Neodiprion sertifer (pine sawﬂy), 309
newts, 78Nicotiana attenuata (wild tobacco), 268
Nicrophorus ,344, 344–5
germanicus , 345
vespilloides , 345
nine-banded armadillo ( Dasypus
novemcinctus ), 654
ninespine stickleback ( Pungitius pungitius ),
253, 253
Nippostrongylus brasiliensis , 352
nodding thistle ( Carduus nutans ), 274, 419
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 708ORGANISM INDEX 709
northern pike ( Esox lucius ), 643
northern pitcher plant ( Sarracenia purpurea ),
282
Nostoc , 404
Nostocaceae, 402
Nothofagus solandri (mountain beech), 160
Notonecta hoffmanni (backswimmer), 285
Notophthalmus viridescens (salamander), 575
Nuphar luteum (waterlily), 271
oak ( Quercus spp.), 18, 92, 167, 271, 340,
354, 355, 481, 550
oak eggar moth ( Lasiocampa quercus ), 83
oak gall wasps, 80
oats, 385Obelia ,91
Ochotona princeps (American pika), 183–4,
184
octopus, 245, 247
Octopus bimaculatus , 245, 247
Odocoileus hemious (mule deer), 169, 453
Oenothera macrocarpa , 272
oligochate worms, 537Omatophoca rossii (Ross seal), 28, 28
Onchocerca volvulus , 349, 362
Oncorhynchus
mykiss , 581, 641
nerka (Paciﬁc salmon), 97, 170
Oniscus asellus , 340
Onitis , 342
uncinatus , 342
viridualus , 342
Onygenaceae, 343Ooencyrtus kuwanai ,288
Operophtera
brumata (winter moth), 176
fagata , 340
oppossum ( Didelphis virginiana ), 86
Opuntia (prickly pear cactus), 11
basilaris ,7 1
fragilis ,3 7
orange-crowned warbler ( Vermivora celata ),
230, 231
orchids, 110Orconectes rusticus (crayﬁsh), 362
Orgyia vetusta , 307
Ornithorynchus anatinus (duckbill platypus),
19
Oryctolagus cuniculus (European rabbit), 378,
446, 566
Orygyia thyellina (white-spotted tussock
moth), 450
Ostertagia gruehneri , 373, 
376
ostrich, 16, 16otters, 129Oulema duftschmidi ,34
oyamel ( Abies religiosa ), 192
oystercatchers ( Haematopus spp.), 155, 157,
573, 580
Paciﬁc salmon ( Oncorhynchus nerka ), 97, 170
painted lady ( Vanessa cardui ), 170
Palaemonetes
pugio , 48, 49
vulgaris , 48, 49
Palulirus interruptus , 245, 247
pampas grass ( Cortaderia selloana ), 450
Panicum maximum , 248, 249
Panthera leo (lion), 284, 343
Papaver
argemone ,8 3
dubium ,8 3
hybridum ,8 3
rhoeas ,8 3
somniferum ,8 3
Paracantha culta (picture-winged ﬂy), 448,
580
Paragnetina media (stoneﬂy), 572
Paragonimus kellicotti (ﬂatworm), 362
Paralicella , 345
Paramecium
aurelia , 229–30, 230, 237
bursaria , 229–30, 230, 237
caudatum , 229–30, 230, 237
parapox virus, 572Parasitylenchus nearcticus , 357, 357
Parasponia , 402
Paropsis atomaria (sawﬂy), 275
Parus ,569, 569
ater(coal tit), 230, 569
caeruleus (blue tit), 230
cristatus (crested tit), 569
major (great tit), 104, 105, 122, 155, 177,
230, 284, 291, 291, 292, 351
montanus (willow tit), 230, 569
palustris (marsh tit), 230
Paspalum ,405, 404
Passiﬂora ,8 8
Pasteuria ramosa ,136
Patella cochlear (limpet), 141, 142, 145
pea ( Pisum sativum ),234, 234, 402
pea aphid ( Acyrthosiphon pisum ),175, 175,
462
Pectinaphora gossypiella (pink bollworm),
448
Pelodera , 329
Pemphigus bursarius (leaf root aphid), 363
penguins, 32, 36Penicillium , 327
peppered moth ( Biston betularia ), 7, 8, 8–9,
9
Perca ﬂavescens ,643
perennial rye grass ( Lolium perenne ), 142,
156, 158, 242, 253–4, 255
periodic cicadas, 168, 168
periwinkle ( Littorina littorea ), 568
Perognathus
amplus (Arizona pocket mouse), 287
baileyi (Bailey’s pocket mouse), 287
Peromyscus ,309
californicus (California mouse), 174
leucopus (white-footed mouse), 291, 292,
640
Peruvian anchovy ( Engraulis ringens ),452,
452, 455
petrels, 126Petromyzon marinus (sea lamprey), 642
Phascogale tapoatafa , 201
Phaseolus lunatus (bean), 318
Phasolarctos cinereus (koala), 5, 213–14, 214,
215
Pheidole , 581
Philodendron ,3 5
Philoscia muscorum , 102
Phlebejus argus , 180
Phleum arenarium ,
250
Phlox drummondii ,98, 98, 99, 100, 113
Phoeniconaias minor (ﬂamingo), 536
Phoraradendron spp. (mistletoe), 266, 350
Phthorimaea operculella (potato tuber moth),
449, 449
Phycomycetes, 328
Phyllonorycter spp., 268
Phyllotis darwini (leaf-eared mouse), 428
Phyllotreta cruciferae (ﬂea beetle), 270, 270
Physa gyrina , 241
Physella girina , 584, 585
Physobrachia , 383
Phytoseiulus persimilis , 318, 319, 448
Pica pica (magpie), 350
Picea (spruce), 22
abies ,335, 335
crithfeldii ,1 8
resinosa ,481, 481
strobus , 481
picture-winged ﬂy ( Paracantha culta ), 448,
580
pied ﬂycatcher ( Ficedula hypoleuca ), 362–3
pied wagtail ( Motacilla alba yarrellii ),280
Pieris
brassicae , 293
rapae , 84, 85, 268, 269
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 709710 ORGANISM INDEX
pigeon ( Chalcophaps stephani ),621
pigmy owl ( Glaucidium passerinum ),569, 569
pine ( Pinus spp.), 22, 173, 195, 481
pine sawﬂy ( Neodiprion sertifer ),309
pink bollworm ( Pectinaphora gossypiella ), 448
Pinus (pine), 22, 173, 195, 481
albicaulis (whitebark pine), 505
banksiana , 572
densiﬂora (red pine), 18, 160
ponderosa (ponderosa pine), 530, 645
radiatus (Monterey pine), 510
resinosa , 554
strobus ,481, 481
sylvestris ,398
Piper cenocladum , 581
Piranga olivacea (scarlet tanager), 167
Pisaster , 584, 595
ochraceus , 568
Pisum sativum (pea), 234, 234, 402
Plasmodiophora brassicae ,348, 349
Plasmodium , 349
azurophilum , 363, 572
Platanthera , 389
plate limpet ( Acmaea scutum ), 280
platte thistle ( Cirsium canescens ), 448
Platynympha longicaudata ,51
Plectonema nostocorum ,4 8
Plectrocnemia conspersa , 287–8, 289
Plectroglyphidodon lacrymatus , 495
Plejebus argus (silver-studded blue butterﬂy),
181, 182
Plodia interpunctella (Indian meal moth),
113, 144, 245, 246, 298, 303, 317, 318,
358, 359, 372, 372–3, 430
Plutella xylostella ,270, 270
Pneumostrongylus tenuis , 571
Poa
annua ,243, 243, 273
pratensis , 260
trivialis , 242
Poecilia reticulata (guppy), 119, 120, 121,
281, 281, 282
Poecilochirus necrophori , 345
polar bears, 343
Pollicipes ,595
polymerus (goose barnacle), 580
polychaete worms, 450, 483
Pomacea , 279
pomacentrid ﬁsh, 495
Pomacentrus wardi , 495, 496
ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa ), 530, 645
poplar ( Populus canadensis ), 271
poplar hybrids ( Populus deltoides x nigra ), 188
poppy, 83Populus ,2 2
canadensis (poplar), 271
deltoides x nigra (poplar hybrid), 188
tremuloides (trembling aspen), 485, 523,
523
Porcellio scabar , 340
porcupines, 271, 286, 575Porphyrio hochstetteri (takahe), 193, 194
Posidonia ,4 9
possums, 639Postelsia palmaeformis (sea palm), 240
pot worms (Enchytraeidae), 330, 331potato leaf roll virus, 349potato tuber moth ( Phthorimaea operculella ),
449, 449
potoroos, 196powdery mildew, 348
prairie bunch grass ( Schizachyrium
scoparium ), 260, 261, 481, 481, 482
prairie dog ( Cynomys spp.), 86, 352
praying mantis, 354prickly pear cactus ( Opuntia ), 11
primates, 341Procellariformes, 126pronghorn antelopes, 453Protaphorura eichhorni , 339
protozoans, 329, 330, 331, 332, 338, 366,
367, 372, 520
Prunus
pumila , 481
serotina (black cherry), 360
speciosa ,480, 480
Pseudocheirus peregrinus (ringtail possum),
280
Pseudochironomous richardsoni
, 581
Pseudochromis fuscus , 570
Pseudomonas , 530
ﬂuorescens , 255, 256, 257, 379
Pseudomyrmex
concolor , 384, 384
ferruginea , 383
Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas ﬁr), 112, 114
Psoralia tenuiﬂora ,77
Pteridium aquilinum (bracken fern), 84, 166,
552
Pteromys volans (ﬂying squirrel), 197–9, 200
Ptychocheilus lucius (Colorado pikeminnow),
189
Puccinellia , 585
Puccinia recondita ,369
Pungitius pungitius (ninespine stickleback),
253, 253
Pyrrhalta nymphaeae (waterlily leaf beetle),
271Pythium , 361
Pyura praeputialis , 161
Quercus (oak), 354, 355
alba (white oak), 77
cerris ,355
petraea ,355
pubescens ,355
pyrenaica (Spanish oak), 528
robur ,92, 340, 355
rubra (red oak), 481, 485
rabbit, European ( Oryctolagus cuniculus ),
378, 446, 566
rabbit ﬂea ( Spilipsyllus cuniculi ), 379
rabbits, 86, 95, 341, 378, 391, 393, 575Radianthus , 383
ragwort ( Senecio ), 79, 115, 115, 450
rail ( Rallina tricolor ),621
rainbow trout ( Oncorhyncus mykiss ), 641
Rallina tricolor (rail), 621
Rana
pipiens (leopard frog), 95
sylvatica (wood frog), 417–19, 418
temporaria
(common frog), 233
Rangifer
tarandus (caribou), 170, 280, 453
tarandus platyrynchus (Svarlbard reindeer),
373, 375–6, 376
tarandus (reindeer), 142, 168
Ranunculaceae, 389
Ranunculus
bulbosus , 389
ﬁcaria , 389
ﬂuitans (water crowfoot), 50
yezoensis , 472, 474
Raphanus sativus (wild radish), 84, 85, 268,
359, 360
rat ( Rattus rattus ), 190, 194, 579, 639
ratites, 16
Rattus rattus (rat), 190, 194, 579, 639
rays, 197red abalone ( Haliotus rufescens ), 640, 641
red admiral ( Vanessa atalanta ), 170
red clover ( Trifolium pratense ), 463
red deer
Cervus elaphus , 102, 103, 103, 103, 104,
104, 119, 133, 134, 421, 421–2
Cervus elaphus scoticus , 194
red ﬁre ant ( Solenopsis invicta ), 190, 201
red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ), 310, 376–8
red grouse ( Lagopus lagopus scoticus ), 363,
373, 374, 375, 424, 429–31, 431
red mangrove ( Rhizophora mangle ), 493
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 710ORGANISM INDEX 711
red maple, 483
red oak ( Quercus rubra ), 481, 485
red pine ( Pinus densiﬂora ), 18, 160
red squirrel ( Sciurus vulgaris ), 572
red-winged blackbird ( Agelaius phoeniceus ),
638
red wood ant ( Formica yessensis ), 385
redroot pigweed ( Amaranthus retroﬂexus ),
249
redshank ( Tringa totanus ),288
reindeer ( Rangifer tarandus ),142, 168
reptiles, 205, 604, 607, 615, 626
Reticulitermes , 338
rheas, 16, 16
Rhinocyllus conicus (weevil), 274, 419, 448,
580
Rhizobium , 248, 249, 249, 402
Rhizoctonia solani ,359, 360
Rhizophora mangle (red mangrove), 493, 615
Rhizopus , 327
Rhododendron maximum (rosebay
rhododendron), 233
Rhombomys opimus (great gerbil), 352
Rhopalosiphum , 447
padi, 268
Rhyacophila anistee , 572
rice, 385
ringtail possum ( Pseudocheirus peregrinus ),
280
river herring ( Alosa spp.), 197, 199, 642
Rivulus hartii (killiﬁsh), 119, 120
roach ( Hesperoleucas symmetricus ), 581
robin ( Erithacus rubecula ), 169
rock dove ( Columba livia ), 363
rodents, 36, 83, 266, 272, 287, 341, 352, 389,
390, 391, 440, 446, 570, 606, 607
Rodolia cardinalis (ladybird beetle), 297, 447
rosebay rhododendron ( Rhododendron
maximum ), 233
Ross seal ( Omatophoca rossii ),28, 28
Rostrahamus sociabilis (snail kite), 279
Rostroraja alba (white skate), 198
rotifers, 83, 330, 331, 332, 476, 477
roundworms, 370
royal catchﬂy ( Silene regia ),216, 216–17, 217
Rubia peregrina (wild madder), 41, 45
ruminants, 53, 82, 392rush ( Juncus squarrosus ), 46
rush moth ( Coleophora alticolella ), 46
rusts, 266
Rutilus rutilus , 570
saguaro cactus ( Carnegiea gigantea ), 45
salamanders, 128, 128, 129, 153, 575Salicornia , 49, 363, 364
Salix , 481
alba (willow), 654
cordata (sand-dune willow), 271, 272
koriyanagi , 637
lasiolepis , 268
Salmo
salar (Atlantic salmon), 170
trutta (brown trout), 139, 139, 140, 190,
286, 581, 640
salmonids, 46, 47, 122, 227, 238
Salvelinus
leucomaenis (white-spotted charr), 46, 47,
227, 228, 238
malma (Dolly Varden charr), 46, 47, 227,
228, 238
Salvina molesta ,423, 423–4
Salvinia (water fern), 166
sand-dune willow ( Salix cordata ), 271, 272
sand sedge ( Carex arenaria ), 171
sand shrimp ( Crangon septemspinosa ), 31, 32
sandpiper ( Calidris spp.), 576
sapphire rockcress ( Arabis fecunda ), 5, 6
sarcophagid ﬂies, 343sardines, 455Sargassum ﬁlipendula ,8 4
sargassum ﬁsh ( Histrio pictus ), 85
Sarracenia purpurea
(northern pitcher plant),
282, 282
sawﬂies, 275, 430
Saxifraga bronchialis (spotted saxifrage), 92
Scaphiopus holbrooki , 241, 575, 575, 576
Scarabeidae, 341
scarlet tanager ( Piranga olivacea ), 167
Sceloporus occidentalis ,116, 116
schistosomes, 348, 349, 370
Schizachyrium scoparium (prairie bunch
grass), 260, 261, 481, 481, 482
Schizocoza spp., 275
Sciurus
carolensis (grey squirrel), 572
vulgaris (red squirrel), 572
Scolytidae, 386scorpions, 615sea anemones, 383, 483, 553, 554, 555
sea buckthorn ( Hippophaë ), 403
sea lamprey ( Petromyzon marinus ), 642
sea otter ( Enhydra lutris ), 640, 641
sea palm ( Postelsia palmaeformis ), 240
sea urchins, 566seagrape ( Coccoloba uvifera ), 582
seals, 28, 28, 343
seaweeds, 381, 577sedge ( Carex spp.), 93, 93, 104, 106, 307Sedum smallii ,259, 259
Senecio ,7 9
jacobaea (ragwort), 115, 115, 450
vulgaris (groundsel), 97
Sequoia sempervirens (coastal redwood), 159
Seraria viridis , 482
Sericomyrmex , 386
sharks, 196–7, 197
she-oak ( Casuarina ), 403
sheep, 233, 266, 280, 391sheep blowﬂy ( Lucilia cuprina ), 326, 351
shepherd’s purse ( Capsella bursa-pastoris ),
145, 243, 243
shipworm ( Teledo navalis ), 337
shrews, 309
shrimps, 5, 48, 332sicklepod ( Cassia obtusifolia
), 249
Silene
alba (white campion), 368, 370, 389
regia (royal catchﬂy), 216, 216–17, 217
silver birch ( Betula pendula ),137, 137
silver-spotted skipper ( Hesperia comma ), 184
silver-studded blue butterﬂy ( Plejebus argus ),
181, 182
Simuliidae, 534
Simulium (blackﬂy)
damnosum , 446
vittatum ,169
Sinapsis alba (mustard), 270, 270, 360
Sitobion avenae , 447
skates, 197, 198
skylark ( Alauda arvensis ), 444, 445
sleepy lizard ( Tiliqua rugosa ), 362
slugs, 271–2, 330smuts, 266snail kite ( Rostrahamus sociabilis ), 279
snails, 86, 169, 199, 241, 253, 254, 268, 279,
330, 334, 576, 584, 585
snowshoe hare ( Lepus americanus ),298, 303,
426, 426, 427
snowy egret ( Egretta thula ), 638
Solanaceae, 270Solenopsis invicta (red ﬁre ant), 190, 201
Solidago ,116
altissima (meadow goldenrod), 485
missouriensis (Missouri goldenrod), 172,
172
mollis ,77
song sparrow ( Melospiza melodia ), 638
Sorex (shrew), 309
South American jungle rabbit ( Sylvilagus
brasiliensis ), 378
southern corn leaf blight ( Helminthosporium
maydis ),46, 46
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 711712 ORGANISM INDEX
southern emu-wren ( Stipiturus malachurus ),
217, 218, 219
southern pine beetle ( Dendroctonus frontalis ),
136
soybean ( Glycine max ), 402, 634, 634
Spanish ibex ( Capra pyrenaica ), 233
Spanish oak ( Quercus pyrenaica ), 528
Sparaxis grandiﬂora ,111
Sparganium emersum , 472, 474
sparrowhawk ( Accipiter nisus ),113
Spartina , 49, 71
alterniﬂora , 638
maritima ,334, 334
patens , 638
Spermophilus beldingi (Belding’s ground
squirrel), 175
Sphagnum subsecundum ,70, 70
Sphyrna tiburo , 196
spider mite ( Tetranychus urticae ), 317, 319,
448
spiders, 163, 275, 275, 570, 571, 582
Spilipsyllus cuniculi (rabbit ﬂea), 379
Spinachia spinachia (ﬁfteen-spined
stickleback), 282
spiny acacia ( Acacia nilotic subsp. indica ),
220–1, 221
spiny anteater ( Tachyglossus aculeatus ), 19
spiny mouse ( Acomys ), 259
Spirillaceae, 402
Spirillum lipiferum , 402
spirochetes, 394Spirorbis , 381
Spirulina platensis , 48, 536
Spodoptera exigua (beet army worm), 443,
444
sponges, 5, 92, 101, 164, 274, 274, 483, 568
spotted alfalfa aphid ( Therioaphis trifolii ), 441
spotted sandpiper ( Actitis macularia ), 638
spotted saxifrage (
Saxifraga bronchialis ),92
springtails (Collembola), 37, 39, 330, 331,
338, 339, 339
spruce ( Picea ), 17, 18, 22, 277, 335, 335
Spumella , 329
squirrels, 271, 273
starﬁsh ( Pisaster ), 568, 584
starling ( Sturnus vulgaris ), 194
steelhead trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ), 581
Stellaria media ,243, 243
Stenophylax , 332
Sterna paradisaea (Arctic tern), 169
Stichodactyla mertensii ,555
sticklebacks, 252, 253
stinging nettle ( Urtica dioica ), 566
Stipa bungeana , 482Stipiturus malachurus (southern emu-wren),
217, 218, 219
Stizostedion vitreum (walleye), 643
stoat ( Mustela erminea ), 194, 310, 435, 639
stoneﬂies, 572, 628, 630strawberry ( Fragaria ),91, 92
Strigops habroptilus (kakapo), 579–80
Strombidinopsis multiauris ,34
Strongyloides ratti , 355, 356
Sturnus vulgaris (starling), 194
Styrax , 635
paralleloneurum , 635
subalpine ﬁr ( Abies lasiocarpa ), 505
subterranean clover ( Trifolium subterraneum ),
140
succulents, 24, 40sugar maple ( Acer saccharum ), 485
Sumatran rhinoceros ( Dicerorhinus
sumatrensis ), 211
Svarlbard reindeer ( Rangifer tarandus
platyrynchus ), 373, 375–6, 376
sweet gale ( Myrica ), 402, 403
sweet vernal grass ( Anthoxanthum odoratum ),
188
swift ( Micropus apus ), 110, 411
sycamore aphid (
Drepanosiphum platanoidis ),
309
Sylvilagus brasiliensis (South American jungle
rabbit), 378
Symbiodinium , 395, 397
Synechocystis sp., 65
Synedra ulna , 230–1, 231, 237
Tachigali myrmecophila , 384, 384
Tachinomyia similis , 307
Tachyglossus aculeatus (spiny anteater), 19
takahe ( Porphyrio hochstetteri ), 193, 194
Tamias striatus (eastern chipmunk), 36
Tana River crested mangabey ( Cerocebus
galeritus ), 213
tapeworms, 266, 348, 349, 356
Taraxacum ofﬁcinale (dandelion), 119, 120
Tarsobaenus , 581
tawny owl, 310Tectus niloticus (trochus), 462
Tegula , 450, 595
aureotincta , 245, 247
eiseni , 245, 247
Teledo navalis (shipworm), 337
tenebrionid beetles, 342Tenodera sinensis , 555
Terebrasabella heterouncinata , 450
termites, 35, 329, 331, 337, 338, 385, 
393–575Terrelia serratulae , 319, 320
Tetranychus urticae (spider mite), 317, 319,
448
Tetraponera penzigi , 385
Teucrium polium ,6 8
Thais ,595
Theileria , 352
Therioaphis trifolii (spotted alfalfa aphid),
441
Thermus aquaticus ,4 0
Thiobacillus
ferroxidans ,4 8
thioxidans ,4 8
thistles
Carduus spp., 448, 580
Cirsium spp., 577, 580
Thlaspi caerulescens , 188
Thomson’s gazelle, 275, 276
three-spined stickleback ( Gasterosteus
aculeatus ), 252
Thrips imaginis (apple thrip), 414
Thuja occidentalis , 481
Thunnus albacares (yellowﬁn tuna), 460, 460,
461, 462
Thymus serpyllum (wild thyme), 385
ticks, 349, 362, 639
Tidestromia oblongifolia (desert honeysweet),
40
tigers, 266
Tilia cordata ,45
Tiliqua rugosa (sleepy lizard), 362
Timarcha lugens , 233
tinamou, 16, 16
tineid moths, 344toads, 241, 575tobacco mosaic virus, 266, 353Tomocerus , 338
Townsend’s vole ( Microtus townsendii ), 174,
175
Trachymyrmex , 386
Trebouxia , 400
trematodes, 572–3, 574, 576
trembling aspen ( Populus tremuloides ), 485,
523, 523
Trialeurodes vaporariorum (whiteﬂy), 448
Tribolium
castaneum , 238–9, 239, 372
confusum , 134, 135, 238–9, 239
Trichechus manatus (Florida manatee),
653
Trichocorixa verticalis , 580
Trichodesmium spp., 539
Trichogramma pretiosum ,295, 295
Trichoplusia ni (cabbage looper), 443, 444
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 712ORGANISM INDEX 713
Trichostrongylus tenuis , 363, 373, 374, 375,
424, 429
Trifolium
hybridum , 630
pratense , 463, 630, 635
repens (white clover), 7, 83, 253–4, 255
subterraneum (subterranean clover), 140
Tringa totanus (redshank), 288
Tripodendron lineatum (ambrosia beetle),
335, 335
Trirhabda canadensis ,172, 172
Trisetum ﬂavescens , 194
Triticum
aestivum (wheat), 385, 447, 634, 634
uniaristatum (wild wheat), 268
trochus ( Tectus niloticus ), 462
trout, 135, 135
Trybliographa rapae ,288
Trypanosoma , 363
trypanosomes, 349
tsetse ﬂy ( Glossina spp.), 349, 394
Tuberculatus quercicola , 385, 386
tuberculosis bacterium, 266Tubularia crocea ,91
Turbinaria reniformis ,92
turtles, 78tussock grass ( Chionochloa pallens ), 276–7,
277
Tympanychus cupido cupido (heath hen),
208–9
Typha (cattail), 124, 126, 233
angustifolia , 124, 126, 233
domingensis , 124, 126
latifolia , 233
Typhlodromus occidentalis ,317
typhoid bacterium, 349Tyto alba (barn owl), 287
Ulex europaeus (gorse), 297, 638
Ulmaceae, 402Ulva spp., 491
Umbilicus rupestris , 37, 40
ungulates, 233Urophora stylata , 319, 320
Ursos
americanus (black bear), 284
arctos (brown bear), 284
Urtica dioica (stinging nettle), 566
Ustilago
tritici (loose smut), 352
violacea (anther smut fungus), 368, 370Vaccinium vitis-idaea (cranberry), 556
Vallisneria spiralis ,64
Vanessa
atalanta (red admiral), 170
cardui (painted lady), 170
‘vedalia’ ladybird beetle ( Rodolia cardinalis ),
297
Venturia canescens , 245, 246, 298, 303, 317,
318, 372, 430
Veratrum lobelianum , 577
Vermivora
celata (orange-crowned warbler), 230, 231
virginiae (virginia’s warbler), 230, 231
Vibrio cholerae (cholera bacterium), 199
viburnum whiteﬂy ( Aleurotrachelus jelinekii ),
323, 323
viceroy butterﬂy ( Limenitis archippus ), 85,
86
Vicia faba , 351
vines, 24Vipera aspis (aspic viper), 113, 114
virginia’s warbler ( Vermivora virginiae ), 230,
231
voles, 305, 309–11, 425, 425, 429, 433–7
Vulpes vulpes (fox), 83, 188, 376–8
Vulpia
ciliata spp. ambigua , 399, 399, 400
fasciculata ,136, 142, 144, 250, 413
walleye ( Stizostedion vitreum ), 643
warbler ﬁnch ( Certhidea olivacea ), 11, 13
warthog, 129wasps, 309, 354, 355, 390–1, 448
water crowfoot ( Ranunculus ﬂuitans ), 50
water fern ( Salvinia ), 166
water hyacinth ( Eichhornia
), 92, 166
water vole ( Arvicola terrestris ), 180
waterlily ( Nuphar luteum ), 271
waterlily leaf beetle ( Pyrrhalta nymphaeae ),
271
weasels, 310, 559
Weddell seal ( Leptonychotes weddelli ),28, 28
weevils, 274, 297, 448, 580
weta ( Deinacrida mahoenuiensis ), 638
whales, 35, 36, 78, 140, 170, 266
wheat ( Triticum aestivum ), 385, 447, 634, 634
whelks, 568white campion ( Silene alba ), 368, 370, 389
white clover ( Trifolium repens ), 7, 83
white-footed mouse ( Peromyscus leucopus ),
291, 292, 640white mangrove ( Laguncularia racemosa ),
493
white oak ( Quercus alba ),77
white pine, 18white skate ( Rostroraja alba ),198
white-spotted charr ( Salvelinus leucomaenis ),
46, 47, 227, 228, 238
white-spotted tussock moth ( Orygyia
thyellina ), 450
white sweet clover ( Melilotus alba ), 97
whitebark pine ( Pinus albicaulis ), 505
whiteﬂy ( Trialeurodes vaporariorum ), 448
wild dog, 275, 276
wild madder ( Rubia peregrina ), 41, 45
wild radish ( Raphanus sativus ), 84, 85, 268,
359, 360
wild thyme ( Thymus serpyllum ), 385
wild tobacco ( Nicotiana attenuata ), 268
wild wheat ( Triticum uniaristatum ), 268
wildebeest ( Connochaetes taurinus ),141
, 278,
279
Willemia aspinata , 339
willow ( Salix spp.), 268, 654
willow tit ( Parus montanus ), 230, 569
winter moth ( Operophtera brumata ), 176
wolf ( Canis lupus ), 304, 305
wood bison ( Bison bison ),307
wood frog ( Rana sylvatica ), 417–19, 418
woodlice (Isopoda), 330woodpecker ﬁnch ( Camarhynchus
(Cactospiza) pallida ), 13
woodpigeon ( Columba palumbus ), 168, 274
Wucheria bancrofti , 349
yeasts, 339yellow-eyed penguin ( Megadyptes antipodes ),
207
yellow net virus, 349yellow star thistle ( Centaurea solstitalis ), 190
yellowﬁn tuna ( Thunnus albacares ),460, 460,
461, 462
Yersinia pestis , 352
Yucca , 390
yucca moth, 390
Zea mays (corn), 37, 234, 234, 385, 634, 634
zebra mussel ( Dreissena polymorpha ), 190,
199–200, 201
zebu cow ( Bos taurus indicus ), 566
Zeiraphera diniana (larch budmoth), 268
Zostera ,4 9
•• ••EIPD02  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 713•• ••Page numbers in italic refer to ﬁgures; those
in bold to tables
abalone ﬁshery management, 640–1
abiotic factors, 30
community population interactions
modulation, 575–6
extreme (harsh environments), 32, 45–6,
611
aboriginal ﬁre management practices, 635,
637
abscission, herbivory response, 268
abundance, 95, 410–38
causal relationships, 411community characterization, 470, 471correlations, 410–11, 422, 422
crowding effects, 303–7, 306
demographic approach, 415–22density approach, 414, 424–9density-dependent processes, 138, 138,
412, 413, 413, 414, 424
density-independent processes
interaction, 428, 428–9
determinants, 411–13, 413, 414
elasticity analysis, 419–20, 420
experimental studies, 411, 422–4
ﬂuctuations, 411, 412, 414, 414
key factor analysis, 415–19
lambda ( λ)-contribution analysis, 419,
421–2
Lotka–Volterra model, 298–9, 300
mechanistic approach, 414, 422–4multiple equilibria, 320–4oscillations seeabundance cycles
patterns, 297predation effects, 274–5regulation, 411–13, 413, 414
stability, 305, 411, 412
study methods, 410, 415
theoretical aspects, 413–15
time-lag equation, 424time series analysis, 424–7, 425, 430, 430
see also population dynamics; population
size
abundance cycles, 297, 298, 299, 324, 
429–37
autocorrelation function (ACF) analysis,
429, 430, 430
delayed density dependence, 299–301,
301
detection, 302–3, 429–30
extrinsic factors, 429intrinsic factors, 429maternal effect model, 434, 434
microtine rodents, 305, 425, 425, 433–7
Nicholson–Bailey model, 301–2one-generation cycles, 302, 303
predator–prey coupled oscillations, 297,
298
red grouse, 424, 429–31, 431
snowshoe hare–lynx system, 298, 303,
426, 426, 427, 431–3, 432
specialist predator hypothesis, 434,
435–6, 436
abyssal zone, 624acclimation, 37, 39
acclimatization, 37acid rain, 51, 546acidic (low pH) environments, 611
plant nutrient availability, 47plant tolerance, 47prokaryote tolerance, 47–8actinomycetes, nitrogen ﬁxation, 402,
403–4
actinorhiza, 402
nitrogen ﬁxation, 403–4
adaptation, 3
local populations, 5, 6, 7
additive experiments, 249, 249
adhesion/anchorage, 49, 50, 381
age at maturity, 110, 119, 121, 121, 196
body size relationship, 127, 127, 128
age-related dispersal, 176
age-speciﬁc reproduction, 99, 104, 105, 105
aggregated distribution, 166, 166, 167, 293,
294
coexistence facilitation, 553density-dependent dispersal, 168interspeciﬁc competition, 241–4, 242
parasites, 361, 362
parasitoid–host encounters, 312, 313,
313–14, 314
population stabilizing effects, 312–13predator foraging, 287, 288, 288, 289
response to prey density, 310–12
predator–prey interactions, 314, 315,
316–20
pseudo-interference, 312–13selﬁsh herd principle, 168spatial/temporal determinants, 167–8
aggregation of risk, 312–13, 314, 314, 318
parasitoid–host interactions, 312–13, 314,
314, 318, 320, 321
aggression, 237, 430, 553agriculture, 186
carbon cycle impact, 547–8ecosystem processes management, 643–5global expansion, 656, 657 Subject indexEIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 714••SUBJECT INDEX 715
habitat restoration, 188, 188
human crop plant/livestock mutualisms,
385
nitrate/phosphate runoff, 528, 544, 545,
644
resistant cultivars, 360, 360
succession management, 634, 634–5
air
adiabatic expansion, 41
see also atmosphere
alcohol dehydrogenase, 339, 340alcoholic fermentation, 327aldrin, 441
algae
aquatic invertebrate symbionts, 395–7
coral reef, 382, 395–7four-level trophic food webs, 581intertidal zone, 49, 50lichen phytobionts, 400–1photosynthetic pigments, 63
absorption spectra, 65
alkaline environments, 48Allee effect, 310, 321, 324allelopathy, 232–3, 237, 274allochthonous primary production, 500, 502allometry, 127, 127–9
allopatric populations, 250, 251
character displacement studies, 253, 253,
254
realized niche, 251
allopatric speciation, 10alpha ( α) diversity, 604
alternative stable states, 183, 322–4altitude
migrations, 169species richness gradients, 603, 623,
623–4, 624
temperature variation, 41
aluminium, 546amebic dysentery, 349amensalism, 226ammonia, 530, 545, 546amphibian fossil record, 626
anadromous species, 197anaerobic metabolism, decomposers, 327–8analogous structures, 19, 19
animal food sources, 79–80
carbon : nitrogen ratios, 79nutritional composition, 81
animals
defenses, 85, 274
dispersal, 165–6
exploration, 165–6food availability ﬂuctuations, 276–8foraging behavior seeforaging
self-thinning populations, 161
annual–biennials, 102
annual plants, 96, 97, 612
gaps colonization, 240
postponed reproduction, 102
herbivory-related, 273
seed banks, 101–2, 102
seeds, 172
annual species, 98–101
cohort life tables, 98, 98–9
discrete generations, 98
annual variations
atmospheric carbon dioxide, 548, 549
energy ﬂow, 523, 524
ant mutualisms, 221, 222, 338
aphid ‘farming’, 385–6, 386
blue butterﬂies, 385
fungal farming, 385–7plants, 383–5, 384
ants
leaf-cutting, 386–7, 387
seed predation, 272species richness, 606–7
aphids
ant ‘farming’ mutualism, 385–6, 386
biological control, 447–8, 462–3, 463, 464
dispersal dimorphism (winged/wingless
morphs), 175, 175
mouthparts, 79, 80
mycetocyte symbionts, 395
phylogenetic analysis, 394, 395
pest control measures, 441plant virus transmission, 349
aposematism, 86apparency theory, 84apparent competition, 244–8, 245, 
246, 247,
260
aquatic biomes, 24
aquatic environments
carbon cycle, 547
carbon dioxide levels, 69–70clonal dispersal, 166euphotic zone, 513, 515, 515
nutrient budgets, 533–9
oxygen levels, 78photosynthetic pigments, 63primary productivity, 500–1, 502, 504, 504
biomass relationship, 504
depth relationship, 515, 515
limiting factors, 512–15
productivity assessment methods, 499
radiation intensity/quality, 60, 61, 62
trophic cascades, 583arbuscular mycorrhizas, 397, 398–400, 399,
645
old ﬁeld succession, 487, 488
area-restricted search, 287, 288arid regions, primary productivity, 507, 509artiﬁcial selection, 37aspirin, 653assembly rules, 620assimilation efﬁciency (AE), 519, 520asulam, 442atmosphere, 526
ammonia, 545, 546carbon dioxide, 52, 69, 527, 547, 548, 549
annual variation in increase, 548, 548
nitrogen, 527, 545nutrient wetfall/dryfall, 528, 529, 546
sulfur, 546terrestrial nutrient losses, 530water vapor, 52, 540
autochthonous primary production, 500, 502autocoprophagy, 341autocorrelation function (ACF) analysis,
429, 430, 430
autolysis, 327autotrophs, 78–9
respiration, 500
Azotobacteria, nitrogen ﬁxation, 402
Bacillaceae, nitrogen ﬁxation, 402
bacteria
biological control agents, 448
decomposers, 326, 327–9, 331, 332, 333,
334
immune response, 353, 366insect mycetocyte symbionts, 394
microparasites, 349
host coevolution, 379, 379, 380
niche differentiation experiments, 255,
256, 257
nitrogen ﬁxation, 402
pH extremes tolerance, 47–8photosynthetic pigments, 59ruminant gut, 391, 392
secondary productivity, 516, 517
serial endosymbiosis theory of
mitochondial evolution, 408
specialist consumers (microbivores), 329
sulfate-reducing, 546termite gut, 394
thermophilic, 40
vertebrate gut mutualisms, 391
bacteriochlorophyll, 59bacteriophage/host coevolution, 379, 379,
380
••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 715716 SUBJECT INDEX
Bancroftian ﬁlariasis, 349
barnacles
cohort life tables, 107, 108
interspeciﬁc competition, 227–9, 232,
233, 238
basic reproductive rate see R0
basking, 35bat pollinators, 389Batesian mimicry, 86
beetles
burying activities, 344, 344–5
carrion consumption, 342
dung removal activities, 341–2, 342
fungal farming mutualism, 386–7
mutual antagonism, 238–9, 239
behavioral response to parasite infection,
354
benthic communities, 624, 625
water ﬂow hazards, 50
benzoin gardens, 635, 636
bicarbonate ions, 70biennial species, 97
seeds, 172
bilharzia seeschistosomiasis
biliproteins, 63, 64
biodiversity, 471, 472, 472, 565, 602
deﬁnition, 602diversity indices, 471–2economic perspective, 653–4ecosystem functioning, 627hotspots, 649
management, 646–52parasites, 347–51
biogeochemical cycles, 526–7, 542–8, 
543
human activities perturbation, 544
biogeochemistry, 526–7biological control, 297, 320, 321, 420,
422–4, 423, 447–8
classical (importation), 447conservation, 447–8dung-removing beetles, 341, 342impact on nontarget species, 448inoculation, 447, 448inundation, 447, 448patchy habitats, 462–3, 463, 464
biological species (biospecies), 9, 11biomass
community characterization, 473deﬁnition, 499–500primary production, 500, 504–5, 505
secondary production, 500
biomes
aquatic, 24terrestrial, 20–4, 22biosecurity, 187
priorities for invasive species, 194–6
bipyridyliums, 442
bird pox, 571birds
age-biased disperal, 176
assembly rules, 620body weight, 128breeding seasons, 102
brood parasites, 350, 350–1
clutch size, 110, 122, 125, 126, 126
coexistence, 230, 232, 238distribution gradients, 487, 488
ectoparasite specialization, 352
extinctions, 203
ﬂightless, 13, 16
forest gap abundance, 493incidence functions, 620, 621
insectivorous, 283–4introduced species invasions, 195island biogeography, 619, 620, 621local subpopulation extinctions, 209migration, 169–70minimum viable population (MVP)
estimates, 210–11, 210
pathogens, 571population size (abundance) regulation,
414
population stability, 414predation, 287, 310
chemical defenses, 85industrial melanism, 9
trophic cascades, 580, 581
predator-mediated coexistence, 569, 
570
salt marsh community restoration, 639,
639
scavenging detritivores, 343
seed-eating, 83seeds dispersal, 165sex-biased dispersal, 176species richness, 612
determinants, 606, 607
remote islands, 618successional gradients, 625, 625
species turnover, 619, 620
temperature regulation, 35territorality, 155, 176
birth/birth rate, 89, 95, 106
assessment, 95density-dependence, 135, 138, 138
body size, 89, 119
age at maturity relationship, 127, 127,
128
allometric relationships, 127–8competition effects, 151–2, 152, 153
asymmetric interspeciﬁc, 233
decomposers (terrestrial), 330, 330
divergent evolution, 561, 561
extinction risk relationship, 196, 196
habitat classiﬁcation, 119
niche differentiation, 559, 560–1offspring size-sensitive/-insensitive
habitats, 118, 119, 120
optimization approaches, 110, 111, 111
phylogenetic constraints, 127, 128, 130
r/Kselection, 124, 130
surface area : volume ratios, 128temperature effects (temperature–size
rule), 33–4, 34
trophic level relationships, 597
body temperature regulation, 34–6, 36
botanical insecticides, 441breeding barriers, 10breeding seasons, 102–5brine lakes, 24brood parasites, 350, 350–1, 572
interspeciﬁc, 350intraspeciﬁc, 350polymorphisms (gentes), 350–1
brood site pollination, 390, 390–1
burrowers, 575burying beetles, 344, 344–5
mite mutulism, 345
butterﬂy–ant mutualisms, 385
C
3pathway, 68, 70–1, 73
Calvin–Benson cycle, 70–1
water-use efﬁciency, 68, 71
C4pathway, 68, 70, 71, 72, 72, 73, 507
Hatch–Slack cycle, 71water-use efﬁciency, 68, 71
calcium, 527, 536
Calvin–Benson cycle, 70–1canonical correspondence analysis, 476, 
477
niche display, 190, 190
captive breeding programs, 212
capture–recapture method, 95carbamates, 441, 442carbaryl, 441carbohydrates
decomposer metabolism, 327ectomycorrhiza-related ﬂows, 398–9leaf litter decomposition, 328, 329
carbon cycle, 525, 530, 543, 547–8
forest age-related changes, 530–1, 531
human activities perturbation, 544
ocean, 538, 540
sinks/sources, 500
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 716SUBJECT INDEX 717
carbon dioxide, 86, 547
absorption by oceans, 54
aquatic environments, 69–70
atmosphere, 527
carbon cycling, 525, 530ﬂux beneath forest canopy, 69, 69
increased levels
decomposer community impact, 80, 82
geological timescales, 72human activities production, 52, 53,
53, 71–2
plant responses, 71–3, 73, 82
photosynthesis, 58, 69–73
terrestrial primary productivity, 505, 506
carbon : nitrogen ratios, 79, 80, 336, 512,
522, 533
soils, 337
carbon : phosphorus ratios, 336, 512, 522
carbonates, 547carbonic acid, 70carnivores, 25, 80, 196, 266
assimilation efﬁciency (AE), 520community structure inﬂuence, 568–71,
575
fecal matter decomposition, 341food preferences, 279freshwater detritivores, 332, 332
nutritional content of foods, 80opportunistic carrion-feeders, 343weakest prey selection, 275, 276, 284
carnivorous plants, 282, 282
carotenoids, 63, 64
carrion, 241
bone/hair/feathers decomposition, 343–4
burying beetle ( Nicrophorus ) activities,
344, 344–5
carcass site successional processes,
489–90
detritivore consumption, 342–5, 344
enzymatic requirements for digestion, 343
facultative consumption, 343, 343
necrotrophic parasites, 352sea-bed scavengers, 345small mammal carcasses decomposition,
335, 336, 343, 344
carrying capacity ( K),138, 138–40, 141
competition models, 146, 147Kselection, 123–4
catastrophic events, 50caves, 611
detritivore communities, 333
cecum fermentation chamber, 391, 391
cellular automaton, 242cellulases, 82, 328, 338–9, 392, 520
animal origin, 337, 338, 339decomposers, 338
detritivore digestive mutualism, 337
cellulose, 79, 82, 83, 385, 520
decomposer metabolism, 328
digestion
detritivores, 337–8, 338
termite gut microbiota, 392–3vertebrate mutualistic microbiota,
391
Chagas’ disease, 640
chamaephytes, 25chaos, 150
detection in ecological systems, 150, 426
population dynamics, 149–50
chaparral, 23–4
character displacement, 251–3, 252, 253, 
254
checkerboard distribution, 561–4, 562, 564
chemical defenses, 83–5, 85, 87, 268
animals, 85, 274apparency theory, 84constitutive, 83digestion-reducing chemicals, 84inducible, 83toxins, 84
chemical pesticides, 441–4
resistance, 446, 446
chemosynthesis, 58Chernobyl nuclear accident, 52
chilling injury, 36–7chitin-synthesis inhibitors, 441chlordane, 441chlorinated hydrocarbons, 441, 444chloroﬂuorocarbons, 53chlorophyll, 59, 63, 64
productivity assessment, 499
chloroplasts, 66
evolution, 408
Chlorphoxim, 446
, 446
choke disease of grasses, 396
cleaner ﬁsh/client mutualism, 382, 382–3
climate
modeling, 54
species richness inﬂuence, 603, 612, 612
see also global climate change; weather
climax community, 488–9, 637
cline, 10–11, 11
clonal dispersal, 166club-root disease, 348, 349
cluster analysis, 476, 477
clutch size, 110, 113, 116, 116, 122–3, 126,
125, 126
allometric relationships, 128, 128, 129
offspring number–ﬁtness trade-off,
122–3, 123cockroach digestive mutualism, 338cod ﬁshery management, 457–8, 458
coevolution, 27, 86, 285
‘arms races’, 83, 84, 285parasite–host, 351, 352, 378–9, 379, 380
coexistence, 28, 229, 230, 232, 234, 237
aggregated distributions, 241–4, 242
environmental ﬂuctuations, 241in ephemeral patches, 241exploitation
more than two resources, 264–5, 265
single resource, 259–61, 261
two resources, 261, 263, 263–4
exploiter-mediated, 566, 566
fugitive/perennial species, 240, 240
gap colonization, 240, 406, 495–6
interspeciﬁc competition, 550, 552, 
564–5
limits to similarity, 257–8niche differentiation, 237, 242, 243, 245,
256–8, 259, 263–4, 553, 556–7
parasite-mediated, 571–2, 572
parasites, 356predator-mediated, 568, 569resource-utilization curves, 257, 257–8
space preemption, 240–1, 241
cohort generation time, 107cohort life tables, 107
annual species, 98, 98–9
intrinsic rate of natural increase ( r)
calculation, 107, 108
repeatedly breeding individuals, 102, 103,
103, 105
cold tolerance, 36–9, 40
genetic aspects, 37–9, 40
collagenase, 343
collector detritivores, 332, 333
collector–ﬁlterers, 332, 332, 534
collector–gatherers, 332, 332
colon fermentation chamber, 391, 391
colonization, 31, 414, 414
dead matter by decomposers, 327
fugitive species, 240gaps, 492–3, 565habitat patch populations, 180, 181
interspeciﬁc competition, 239, 240island species richness, 617–18local plant populations, 182metapopulations, 183, 185
stability, 181
new island of Surtsey, 617–18, 619
r/Kspecies, 124, 180
space preemption, 240–1, 241
succession mechanisms, 483–4
commensalism, 381–2
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 717718 SUBJECT INDEX
common garden experiments, 5, 6, 7, 7–8
communities, 20–5, 467, 469–98
assemblage rules/constraints, 469, 469
boundaries, 478
classiﬁcation, 477–8climax, 488–9collective properties, 469, 470competition effects, 550–65
competition prevalence, 550–2complexity, 586, 588–93composition characterization, 470–3diversity indices, 471–2dominance-controlled, 479, 489–90
dynamically robust/dynamically fragile,
586
emergent properties, 469, 470
energy ﬂow, 473equilibrium/nonequilibrium theories,
565
founder-controlled, 479, 493, 495–6gradient analysis, 474habitat scale, 470individualistic concept, 478landscape perspective, 496–7as level of organization, 478life form spectra, 24–5necromass, 486–7ordination, 477–8parasitism inﬂuences, 571–5patch dynamics, 489–96population interactions, 550–77
facilitation, 577modulation by physical conditions,
575–6
predation inﬂuences, 566–71, 573–5rank–abundance diagrams, 472–3, 473,
474
resilience, 586, 590, 592–3, 593
resistance, 586, 589response to disturbance, 479spatial patterns, 474–8species richness, 470–1, 471
stability, mathematical models, 586–8,
589
succession seesuccession
superorganism concept, 478temporal patterns, 478–82trophic structure, 517–19, 518, 585
compensation point, 63, 71competition, 31, 58
ant mutualisms, 383
apparent (for enemy-free space), 244–8,
245, 246, 247, 260, 605
asymmetric, 151–3, 153, 233resource preemption, 152–3
size inequalities, 151–2, 152, 153
skewed distributions, 152, 152, 153,
153
compensation, 143, 145, 147, 148
contest, 143, 145, 155deﬁnition, 132density-dependence
mortality/fecundity, 134–5, 135
population growth, 141–2
environmental inﬂuences, 46, 47, 241
exploitation, 132–3, 133, 232–3
more than two resources, 264–5, 265
single resource, 260–1, 261
two resources, 261, 263, 263–4
food web effects, 578, 579
interference, 132–3, 232, 293
mutual predator/prey, 304, 305, 307
interspeciﬁc, 225, 226, 227–65
additive experiments, 249, 249
aggregated distributions, 241–4, 242
allelopathy, 232–3character displacement, 251–3, 252
coexistence, 229, 230, 232, 234, 237,
550, 564–5
community organization inﬂuence,
550–65, 575, 576
community structuring power, 552–3competitive exclusion, 229, 232, 234,
237–8
competitive release, 251, 252ecological aspects, 232evolutionary effects, 232, 250–7extinctions, 559–60logistic (‘Lotka–Volterra’) model,
234–7, 238, 239
mutual antagonism, 238–9natural experiments, 253–4, 255
negatively associated distributions,
561–4, 562
niche differentiation, 553–9preemptive, 239, 240–1, 241
prevalence in communities, 550–2resource interdependence, 233–4response surface analysis, 249–50, 250
selection experiments, 254–7
species richness inﬂuence, 603, 605
substitutive experiments, 248–9, 249
symmetric/asymmetric, 233
intraspeciﬁc, 132–62
predation-related reduction, 274–5
kin competition avoidance, 173–4
mathmatical models, 146–51
continuous breeding, 150–1discrete breeding seasons, 146–50
population dynamics, 148–9, 149
time lags incorporation, 147–8
modular organisms, 166nitrogen-ﬁxing mutualisms, 404–5, 405
one-sided, 133–4parasite burden effects, 363parasites within hosts, 355–6, 357
plants/decomposers for minerals, 76,
336–7
population density (crowding), 135–7population size regulation, 138–41, 139,
153
quantiﬁcation, 142–5, 144, 145
effects on fecundity/growth, 145, 145
r/Kselection, 124
scramble, 143, 145, 148self-thinning, 156–61succession mechanisms, 483–4territorality, 154, 155–6, 156
competition coefﬁcient, 257–8competition coefﬁcient ( α), 234
competitive exclusion, 229, 232, 234, 237–8,
251, 550, 565, 607
gaps colonization, 240niche theory, 237–8
Competitive Exclusion Principle (Gause’s
Principle), 238, 257
competitive lottery, 495
competitive release, 251, 252complementarity, 629, 630Congo hemorrhagic fever, 640conservation, 187, 192–3
economic aspects, 653head-starting programs, 420landscape restoration, 188, 188
management interventions, 217
global climate change impact, 221–2
metapopulations, 217–18, 218, 219
migratory species, 201–3
population dynamics of small
populations, 203–18
population viability analysis (PVA),
209–17
priorities, 204–5, 207
succession management, 638systematic planning, 648–9threatened species lists, 204, 205
conservation biological control, 447–8
conservation reserves, 192, 193
area modeling, 214–16linkage zones, 202, 203location, 218, 222, 646–51
migratory species, 202–3
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 718SUBJECT INDEX 719
constant ﬁnal yield, 141–2, 143, 144, 355,
356
consumers (heterotrophs), 58, 79, 266
effects of consumption, 276–8
food quality, 278, 279
heterotrophic respiration, 500ideal free distribution, 293–5, 294
resources relationship, 336
satiation, 276, 277, 278secondary productivity, 500trophic levels, 516
consumption efﬁciency (CE), 519, 519, 522
contact rate, 358–60
continentality, temperature effects, 41
continuous-time models, 314–15convergent evolution, 19–20copper, 528
environmental contamination, 188
coprophagy, 338, 391, 393
detritivores, 336, 339invertebrate feces, 340, 340–1
vertebrate feces, 341–2
coral reef
behavioral mutualisms, 383bleaching, 395–7, 396, 397
breeding seasons, 102cleaner ﬁsh/client mutualism, 382, 382–3
community structure/succession, 487disturbance events, 479ﬁsh coexistence, 495–6, 496
photosynthetic (algal) symbionts, 382,
395–7
cost of reproduction (CR), 115, 115, 117
habitat classiﬁcation, 118, 118–19, 120,
121
optimal clutch size, 123
crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM), 68,
70, 71
critical community size, 366critical population size, 365–6, 367critically endangered species, 203crop pathogens
parasite/host coevolution, 379population dynamics, 368–9, 369
crop plants
genetic modiﬁcation, 444, 445
harvest management seeharvest
management
human mutualism, 385succession management, 634, 634–5
crowding, 136, 137
competition, 135–7, 147predator–prey population dynamics,
303–7, 306crypsis, 85
cryptophytes, 25culling, 377
Cultural Stream Health Measure (CSHM),
647, 646
currents, 50
cuticle decomposition, 328cyanobacteria
nitrogen ﬁxation, 402, 404
serial endosymbiosis theory of
chloroplast evolution, 408
cyclone damage, 50
dams, 538
Darwin, Charles, 3, 4, 331, 566
Darwin’s ﬁnches, 11, 12
day-degree concept, 33DDT, 441, 447
resistance, 445
dead organic matter
biochemical composition, 336, 337decomposer system energy ﬂow, 519,
521, 522
decomposition, 326, 327, 333, 336, 337
detritivore/decomposer role
comparison, 333–5
see also carrion
death seemortality/mortality rate
decaying matter, 241
see also carrion; dead organic matter
deciduous habit, 172decision analysis, 211, 211–12
decomposers, 326–46
biochemical composition, 336cellulases, 338collagenases, 343community trophic structure, 517, 519deﬁnitions, 326detritivore role comparison, 333–5donor-controlled nutrient supply, 326energy ﬂow, 521, 522organisms, 327–9r-selected species, 327
resources, 82, 326, 327respiratory heat loss, 521secondary production, 521size classiﬁcation, 330
, 330–1
specialists, 327, 328
succession, 328–9, 329
temperature effects, 331–2
water requirements, 332
decomposition
biological oxygen demand, 78carbon dioxide production, 69heat generation, 40
keratin, 344nutrient cycling, 525–6small mammal carcasses, 335, 336
species richness effects, 627, 628wood, 335, 335
deep sea vents seehydrothermal vents
defoliation, 275
fecundity impact, 273plant responses, 270, 270–1, 271
plant survival, 271
deforestation, 499, 527, 547
biogeological cycles perturbation, 544,
545
hydrological cycle perturbation, 543nutrient budget impact, 532
deltamethrin, 441demographic processes, 89dengue fever, 219–20, 220
denitriﬁcation, 530, 545denitrifying bacteria, 328density-dependence, 411
aggregation of risk, 312, 314compensation, 134, 135, 151competition, 134–5, 135
interspeciﬁc, 237models, 147–8, 151quantiﬁcation, 143, 144, 145, 145
delayed, 424, 425
coupled oscillations in abundance,
299–301, 301
dispersal, 168, 169, 173–5
emigration, 178fecundity, 135, 136, 138, 140, 145, 145
foraging
aggregative response, 287, 288, 288,
289, 295
parasitoids, 288
growth, 141–2, 142, 145, 145
key factor analysis, 416–17
mortality, 134–5, 135, 138, 140
parasite infection, 354–5, 356
macroparasites, 369–70transmission, 358–60, 359
parasitoid–host encounters, 312
population growth, 141–2population size (abundance) regulation,
138, 138, 412, 413, 413, 414, 424
predator aggregative responses to prey
density, 310
prey predation risk, 294
temporal, 313, 315time series analysis, 424–7
depensation, 455
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 719720 SUBJECT INDEX
depth
solar radiation attenuation, 62, 62
species richness gradients, 603, 624, 625
desert, 24
food availability ﬂuctuations, 278, 278
seed banks, 102
dessiccation, 39, 40
intertidal organisms, 49, 50
detritivores, 79, 82, 225, 226, 264, 326–46,
583
assimilation efﬁciency (AE), 520
biochemical composition, 336carrion consumption, 342–5
cellulolysis, 337–8, 338
community trophic structure, 518
decomposer role comparison, 333–5donor-controlled nutrient supply, 326dung removal activities, 341–2, 342
freshwater communities, 332, 332–3, 333,
335
fruit consumption, 339–40invertebrate feces consumption, 340–1latitudinal gradients, 331, 331
organisms, 329–33plant matter consumption, 337–9, 338
resources, 326, 327
interactions, 337–45
small mammal carcasses decomposition,
335, 336, 343, 344
soil populations, 331specialists, 327, 328wood consumption, 335
detritus, 487development, 89, 110
modular organisms, 92temperature effects, 33–4, 34, 41
unitary organisms, 89
diapause, 171diatoms
competition for silicate, 230–1, 231, 237
decomposers, 328interspeciﬁc competition, 263
diazinon, 441dieldrin, 441, 444diet width, 278–9
optimal foraging theory, 282, 283–4, 284
diﬂubenzuron, 441digestion
vertebrate herbivores, 82–3wood, termite gut microbiota, 392
dimethylsulﬁde (DMS), 546
dimorphism, 175, 175
diphenamid, 442
diphtheria, 367diquat, 442
disease, 347
environmental inﬂuences, 46
global climate change impact, 218–21
insect vectors, 219–20see also infection; microparasites
disharmony, 620dispersal, 163–6, 187
active, 163, 165–6
age-related differences, 176breeding, 163clonal, 166corridors, 217
deﬁnition, 163
demographic signiﬁcance, 176 –8density-dependent, 168, 169, 173–5
dimorphism, 175, 175
evolutionarily stable strategy, 174inbreeding avoidance, 173invasion, 167island biotas, 13, 620kin competition avoidance, 173–4metapopulation demography, 180–5natal, 163, 176passive, 163–4, 165
by mutualistic agent, 164–5
patch colonization, 167, 176–7polymorphism, 175population dynamics, 176–8
predator–prey interactions, 315–17,
316
seeds, 178
fruit herbivory, 272–3
sex-related differences, 176turnover, 167variation within populations, 175–6
distribution (dispersion), 166–8
equitability/evenness, 471gradient analysis, 474, 475
humidity inﬂuence, 46–7interspeciﬁc competition, 227, 229, 230
aggregated distributions, 241–4, 242
invasion dynamics, 180negative associations (‘checkerboard’
distributions), 561–4, 562, 564
niche differentiation, 259niche-orientated models, 472salinity inﬂuence, 48–50soil/water pH inﬂuence, 47–8temperature correlations, 41, 44–7, 45
extreme conditions, 45–6
interacting factors, 46–7
disturbance events, 489, 527, 565, 612
catastrophic events/disasters, 50, 414, 414community structure inﬂuence, 575–6
microcosm experiments, 497, 497
frequency, 490, 491
intermediate disturbance hypothesis,
490
recovery classes, 485–6
species richness effects, 603, 609, 609
successional processes, 490, 490
diurnal variation
forest canopy carbon dioxide levels, 69,
69
movement, 168–9
solar radiation, 59
diversity seebiodiversity
diversity indices, 471–2dominance-controlled communities, 479,
489–90
dominance–decay model, 472dominance hierarchy, ant mutualisms, 385dominance–preemption model, 472dormancy, 37, 67, 171–3
breaking mechanisms, 41, 75consequential, 171enforced, 172induced, 172innate, 172predictive, 171seeds, 102, 171, 172
drought
leaf adaptations, 68species distribution impact, 45strategies in seasonally dry tropical forest,
68, 68
dryfall, 528, 529, 546
dung removal activities, 341–2, 342
Dutch elm disease, 271dynamic pool models, harvest management,
456–8
dynamic thinning lines, 156–8, 158
–3/2 power law, 157, 158, 159, 160slope of –1, 158
earthworms
detritivory, 330, 331, 332earth-moving activities, 331
ecological speciation, 10, 10
ecological stoichiometry, 336–7, 512–13economically optimum yield, 459, 459
economics
’discounting’, 459injury levels, 440, 440
thresholds, 440–1
ecosystem engineers, 381–2, 396, 575, 585
effects of parasitism, 572–3
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 720SUBJECT INDEX 721
ecosystems, 467, 499
deﬁnition, 499
energy ﬂux, 499–524
health assessment, 645–7
net productivity (NEP), 500
nutrient recycling (ﬂux of matter), 525–49
processes, species richness relationship,
473
respiration (RE), 500
ecotypes, 5, 7, 8
ectomycorrhizas, 397–9
niche differentiation, 554, 557
nutrient mobilization, 527, 528
ectoparasites, 349, 362, 363
specialization, 351, 352
ectotherms, 34–5, 606
heat exchange pathways, 35
production efﬁciency, 520
effective population size ( Ne), 206, 207
eggs, 101
diapause, 171
size/number trade-off, 116, 116
El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 41,
42, 428, 455, 523–4, 548
elasticity analysis, abundance, 419–20, 420
elephantiasis, 349
elicitins, 353embryonic development, 89emigration, 163, 176, 177
density-dependence, 178evolutionarily stable strategy, 174
endangered species, 203, 205
conservation activities seeconservation
critically endangered, 203extinction
prediction, 196risk factors, 205
fundamental niche, 193loss of genetic variation, 205management interventions, global
climate change impact, 221–2
migratory species, 201–2minimum viable population (MVP)
estimates, 211
population dynamics of small
populations, 203–18
protected areas, 647species protection plans, 647vulnerable species, 203
endemic species, 13
island populations, 620–1, 621
endotherms, 34–6, 36, 128, 606
production efﬁciency, 520thermoneutral zone, 35, 35enemy-free space, 244–8, 605energy ﬂow, 499–524
annual variations, 523, 524
communities, 473
comparative aspects, 521, 521–4, 522
food webs, 499, 517–19, 518
trophic levels, 595
nutrient cycling relationship, 525–6, 
526
transfer efﬁciencies, 519–20
engineers seeecosystem engineers
Enterobacteriacea, nitrogen ﬁxation, 402
environmental conditions, 30–57
community composition, 20–5
rotifers, 477–8
extreme, 32, 45–6, 611global change, 52–6
interspeciﬁc competition impact, 241natural selection, 3, 4, 5niche differentiation, 259optimal range, 30, 30
response curves, 30, 30–1
environmental grain, 167, 167
environmental heterogeneity, 25–7
continuous-time models, 314–15
interspeciﬁc competition, 239
coexistence enhancement, 243–4
parasitoid–host interactions, 312, 313,
313–14
predator–prey interactions, 311, 312,
316–20, 317
species richness enhancement, 603,
609–11, 610
see also patches/patchiness
ephemeral patches, 241ephemerals, 102epidemic infection, 360
curve, 366, 366–7
epiphytes, 24equitability/evenness of distribution, 471ergot, 396ericoid mycorrhizas, 397, 400estuaries, 48
nutrient budgets, 537
productivity, 504
eukaryotes, evolutionary aspects, 408
euphotic zone, 513, 624
depth, 515, 515
eutrophication
biomanipulation, 642, 643
coastal, 643nitrogen, 545, 546phosphorus, 545rotifer community composition, 477evaporation, 46, 47, 58, 543
high temperature adaptations, 39
evapotranspiration, 75, 507, 509
see also potential evapotranspiration
(PET)
evolutionarily stable strategies, dispersal,
174
evolutionary aspects, 3–29
constraints, 5
eukaryote origins, 408food chain length, 597–8genetic diversity, 206interspeciﬁc competition, 232, 250–7
island populations, 620–1life histories, 110–16subcellular structures from symbioses,
407–8, 408
tropical species richness, 622
exotic invaders, 571
biological control, 447erradication programs, 579, 579
food web indirect effects, 579, 579–80
pest species, early control, 450
exploitation, 132–3, 133, 136
competition seecompetition
niche differentiation, 258–65
exponential growth, 146, 146
extinction, 187
fossil record, 627, 628
habitat area, 209, 210
habitat destruction, 177, 177
habitat patch populations, 180, 181human activities-related, 202–4interspeciﬁc competition, 236, 237, 559–60island populations, 209
’equilibrium’ theory, 614, 614, 615
species richness, 618, 620
local plant populations, 182metapopulations, 183, 185, 208, 316, 317
stability, 181
modern/historical rates, 203, 204
pathogen-related, 571population persistence time ( T) models,
212–13, 213
r/Kspecies, 180
rapid climate change, 18risk, 204, 206
categories, 203, 205
prediction, 196, 198, 209, 210
rare species, 204
subpopulations, 176vortex, 207, 207
extreme conditions, 32, 45–6, 50, 611
species distribution, 45
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 721722 SUBJECT INDEX
facilitation, 484, 577, 629, 642
farming mutualisms, 385–7fatty acid metabolism, gut mutualistic
microbiota, 391, 392, 393
fecal matter
decomposition, 327, 333, 334
ammonia release, 530
detritivores consumption seecoprophagy
dung removal activities, 341, 342
fecundity
age-speciﬁc, 99, 104, 105, 105
density-dependence, 140, 145, 145
competition effects, 135, 136
parasitism effects, 361–5, 362
plant herbivory effects, 272–4
fecundity schedules, 97, 98, 98, 99, 107
intrinsic rate of natural increase ( r)
calculation, 107, 108
population projection matrices, 108–10
repeatedly breeding individuals, 104static, 104
fermentation
decomposers, 327fruit decomposition, 339–40gut mutualistic microbiota, 391ruminant gut, 391–2termite paunch, 393
fertilizer application, 536, 537
nitrate/phosphate runoff, 528, 544, 545,
644
ﬁeld capacity, 74, 75, 507ﬁg–ﬁg wasp mutualism, 390, 390–1
ﬁlariasis, 349ﬁre, 23, 24, 40, 50, 240, 400, 527
aboriginal traditional land management,
635, 637
atmospheric carbon dioxide elevation,
548
atmospheric nutrient losses, 530plant adaptations (protected meristems),
39
seed germination stimulation (serotiny),
173
vegetation recovery classes, 486
ﬁsheries collapse, 452, 452, 455
environmental ﬂuctuation effects, 455,
456
ﬁsheries management, 457–8, 458, 460–2
abalone ﬁshery, 640–1dataless, 462maximum sustainable yield, 451, 451–2,
463
no-take zones, 463reserve networks design, 463, 465, 465stock assessment, 460–2
sustainability objectives, 654, 655
time series analysis, 461
yield–effort relationships, 460, 460
see also harvest management
ﬁshes
cleaner/client mutualism, 382, 382–3
competition, 46, 47
eutrophication biomanipulation, 643, 
643
extinctions, 205
risk prediction, 196, 198
food webs, 581
human activities impact, 189, 190, 197
invaders, 190, 190
migration, 170, 197niche space display, 190, 190
salt marsh community restoration, 639
ﬁtness, 4, 5, 30
heterozygotes versus homozygotes
(heterosis), 7
inbreeding depression, 173life history traits, 110number of offspring trade-off, 116, 116,
122
optimal foraging theory, 282
outbreeding depression, 173
parasite infection effects, 361–2, 362
plant herbivory responses, 268, 270
ﬁtness contours, 117, 117–18
habitat effects, 118
ﬁxed proportion harvesting, 453–4
ﬁxed quota harvesting, 452ﬂightless birds, 13, 16
ﬂocks, selﬁsh herd principle, 168ﬂoral traits, herbivory impact, 272ﬂowering, herbivory impact, 273
food
availability, 276–8
population cycles, 437
population growth, 422, 422
patchy distribution, 287preferences, 279–80, 280
switching, 281, 281–2, 285, 308, 309,
570, 571
quality, 278, 279, 280
see also diet width
food chains, 78–9
energy ﬂux, 499length, 594–5, 595, 596
evolutionary constraints, 597–8predators, 595productivity relationship, 595–6, 596
food niches, 27food webs, 150, 578–601
bottom-up (donor) control, 583, 584community characterization, 473, 585compartmentalization, 598–9, 599, 600
energy ﬂow, 499, 517–19, 518
transfer efﬁciency, 595
four-level trophic systems, 581–3, 582
indirect effects, 578–85keystone species, 584–5, 593management applications, 639–47omnivores, 598, 598
productivity, 585, 595–7species richness–connectance
relationships, 588, 590, 590–1
stability, 585, 586, 587, 588–93
models, 586–8, 589, 597, 597
strong interactors, 584–5top-down control, 583–4, 585
trophic cascades, 580, 580, 581, 584
trophic levels, 593–5
foot-and-mouth disease, 366
foraging, 267, 285–7
abandonment of unproﬁtable patches,
287–8, 289, 289
animal memory models, 292–3, 293
area-restricted search, 287, 288
handling time, 283, 284
learned behavior, 292, 293marginal value theorem, 289–92, 290,
291, 292
optimal foraging theory, 282–3
patch use, 288–93
patch stay-time, 289, 291
patchy environments, 287–95predation risk, 285–6predator aggregative response, 287, 288,
288, 289, 295
search time, 283, 284strategy, 285–6
forest
age-related carbon budget changes,
530–1, 531
biomass, 500carbon dioxide levels, 69, 69
clearance, 547
see also deforestation
decomposers, 331, 333
disturbance events, 479
ecosystem health assessment, 645energy ﬂow, 521, 523, 524
gaps, 613
colonization, 496
mineral nutrient wetfall/dryfall, 528, 529
nutrient cycling, 531, 531
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 722SUBJECT INDEX 723
photosynthetic efﬁciency, 507
primary productivity, 501, 503
biomass relationship (NPP : B ratios),
504, 505, 506, 506
growing season duration, 509–10, 510
soil texture, 509, 509
refuges, 18
succession, 482–3, 483
see also taiga; temperate forest; tropical
forest
forestry, 186
habitat loss/fragmentation, 197
fossil fuels combustion, 528, 546, 547
fossil record
mammalian herbivore extinctions, 627,
628
taxon richness, 626, 626–7
founder-controlled communities, 479, 493,
495–6
founder effect, 13
founder population, 13foxes
opportunistic carrion-feeding, 343, 343
rabies transmission, 376–8, 377
freeze-avoiding strategy, 37, 38
freeze-tolerant strategy, 37freezing injury, 36, 37, 45frequency dependence
life history traits, 110parasite transmission, 358–60
directly transmitted microparasites,
368, 369, 370
frequency-dependent selection
exploiter-mediated coexistence, 570–1polymorphisms maintenance, 7
freshwater biomes, 24freshwater environments
detritivores, 332, 332–3, 333
decomposer role comparison, 335
interspeciﬁc competition, 551osmoregulation, 48
plant matter decomposition, 336, 337, 337
primary productivity–biomass
relationship, 504
fruit-feeders, 272–3, 493, 520, 612
detritivores, 339–40seed dispersal mutualism, 387, 388
fruits, 79, 165, 387, 388
fugitive species, 240functional responses
parasitoid–host relationships, 313–14
type 1, 307, 307, 313
type 2, 307–8, 307, 311, 313–14
type 3, 308–11, 309, 310, 321fundamental net reproductive rate see R
fungi
aquatic, 327, 328
decomposers, 326, 327–9
carrion, 343
wood, 335
detritivore consumption, 339farming by ants/beetles, 385–7
lichen mycobionts, 400–1microparasites, 349, 352, 354, 389, 571plant mutualisms, 381–2, 396–400plant parasites, 349, 352, 354, 356, 397
crop pathogens, 368–9
transmission, 387
plant root association seemycorrhizas
specialist consumers, 329
spores, 327, 328
thermophilic, 40vertebrate gut mutualistic microbiota,
391
fungivorore mutualisms, 329
gall-forming insects, 349, 354, 355
galls, 354
gamma ( γ) richness, 604
gaps, 489
colonization, 50, 167, 240, 492–3, 495,
495, 565
coexistence promotion, 495–6, 
496
space preemption, 240–1
formation, 492–3
frequency, 490–2, 491
successional processes, 489–90, 490
tropical rainforest canopy, 24
Gause’s Principle (Competitive Exclusion
Principle), 238, 257
generalists, 79, 279
optimal foraging theory, 283–4
generation time, 105, 106, 107, 196
food abundance response relationships,
277–8
generations
discrete, 98, 105overlapping, 102, 103, 105, 107, 108
genetic drift, 205genetic polymorphism, 6
brood parasites (gentes), 350–1
genetic variation
cold tolerance, 37–9, 40
life history trade-offs, 113pesticides resistance, 445pollution tolerance, 51small populations, 205–7theory of natural selection, 3, 4genetically modiﬁed (GM) crops, 444, 445
genets, 92geophytes, 25germination, 41, 75
following dormancy, 172following ﬁre (serotiny), 173
glaciers, 542global biogeochemical cycles, 542–3, 543
major pathways, 543, 543
global climate change, 16–18, 17, 18, 54,
54–6, 55, 56, 187, 499, 657
coral reef bleaching, 395endangered species conservation, 221–2hydrological cycle perturbation, 543management aspects, 218–22
global net primary production, 500, 500
global species richness, 203glucosinolates, 83, 84, 85, 85, 86, 268
glycerol in freezing avoidance, 37, 38
glyphosate, 442, 444glyphosphate herbicides, 442gradient analysis, 474
gradients, 26
hard boundaries, 624polymorphisms maintenance, 7, 8species richness, 621–6
grain of environment, 167, 167
grasses
aggregations coexistence, 242
competition for nitrogen, 260–1, 261, 262
grazing tolerance, 271
grassland, 23
community stability, 591, 591, 592
disturbance events, 479
diversity, 472
energy ﬂow, 521
gaps colonization, 493, 496–7niche differentiation, 559nitrogen availability, 533, 533
primary productivity, 511, 627–8
growing season duration, 510, 511
latitudinal trends, 501water/temperature interrelationships,
508, 508
restoration, 194, 195, 638
species richness, 606–7, 627–8
grazer–scraper detritivores, 332, 332, 534
grazers/grazing, 23, 79, 266, 271–2, 487
alternative stable states, 322–4community structure, 517, 519, 566,
566–8, 567, 569
consumption efﬁciency, 522energy ﬂow, 521, 522exploitation competition, 233
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 723724 SUBJECT INDEX
grazers/grazing (Cont’d)
exploiter-mediated coexistence, 566, 566–7
food webs, 583, 584
trophic cascades, 582
microbivores, 329
species richness effects, 566, 566–8, 567,
568, 609
greenhouse effect, 52–4, 54, 56, 547
greenhouse gas emissions, projected
increases, 656, 657
gross primary productivity (GPP), 500
groundwater, 542
pollution, 643, 644
groups, selﬁsh herd principle, 168growing season duration, 622growth, 97
density-dependence, 141–2, 142, 145, 145
life history options, 117modular organisms, 90, 92, 91, 92
parasitism effects, 354, 361–5temperature effects, 33–4, 34
guano, 502Guardians of Fiordland’s Fisheries and
Marine Environment (GOFF), 655
guilds, 555
morphological differentiation, 559niche complementarity, 555
gut symbionts, 391–3, 520
vertebrates, 391
habitat restoration, 187–90, 218
intensive agriculture, 188, 188
life history traits as predictors, 194, 195
migratory species, 197–9, 200
mining contamination, 187–8river ecosystems, 188–90, 189
habitats, 31
area
extinction risk, 209, 210
species richness, 613–15, 616
classiﬁcation, 118, 118–19, 124
destruction, 202, 205
metapopulation extinctions, 177, 177
fragmentation, 217hierarchy, 470high/low cost of reproduction (CR), 118,
118–19, 120, 121
life history relationships, 110, 117, 130offspring size-sensitive/-insensitive, 118,
119, 120, 121–2
r/Kselection, 123–4, 125, 126, 130–1
halophytes, 48, 49handling time, 283, 284, 308
functional responses, 307, 308harems, 133
harsh environments, 611, 611
see also extreme conditions
harvest management, 439–40, 450–66, 527
constant escapement strategy, 453–4, 454
dynamic pool models, 456–8, 457
economic ‘discounting’, 459
economically optimum yield, 459, 459
environmental ﬂuctuations impact, 455,
456
ﬁxed harvesting effort, 452–3, 453
ﬁxed proportion harvesting, 453–4
ﬁxed quotas, 452
maximum sustainable yield, 451, 451–2
multiple equilibria, 454, 454–5
objectives, 458
predator–prey relationships, 459–60, 460
social factors, 459–60
stock assessment, 460surplus yield models, 456time series analysis, 461, 462
yield–effort relationships, 460, 460
see also ﬁsheries management
Hatch–Slack cycle, 71Hawaiian Islands fruit-ﬂies, 13, 14
head-starting programs, 419heat tolerance, 39–41
water loss, 39
heathland, 545
invasion by scrub and trees, 179, 180 
heavy metals
accumulators, 51tolerance, 187, 188
helminth parasites, 349, 370
immune response, 353
hemicryptophytes, 25herbicides, 441–2
environmental pollution, 444impact on nontarget species, 444
herbivore–plant interactions
Allee effect, 324alternative stable states, 322–4coupled oscillations, 298
population dynamics modeling, 297see also predator–prey interactions
herbivores/herbivory, 25, 266, 267–74
aggregative behavior, 311assimilation efﬁciency (AE), 520consumption efﬁciency (CE), 519
coprophagy, 341–2diet width, 279food preferences, 280food quality, 79–80, 81, 278
fruit seefruit-feedersgut mutualistic microbiota, 82, 391interspeciﬁc competition, 552keystone species, 585plant compensation, 267
defoliation, 270, 270–1
growth response, 271
timing, 270, 273, 274
plant defenses, 268–70, 269
ant–plant mutualisms, 383, 384
chemical, 83–4, 85, 85
constitutive, 268, 270
inducible, 268–9, 270physical, 83
plant fecundity impact, 272–3
plant matter digestion/assimilation, 82–3plant pathogen transmission, 271plant survival, 271–2
specialist feeders, 79–80, 84, 85
tissue composition, 80vertebrate gut structure, 82–3
herd immunity, 367herds, selﬁsh principle, 168heterocyclic nitrogen herbicides, 442heterotrophs seeconsumers
hibernation, 35HIV, 190holdfast, 49, 50, 84hole dwellers, 86Holling’s type 2 response equation, 308homologous structures, 19, 20
hot springs, 40, 58, 611human activities, 186
carbon cycle perturbation, 544, 547–8
ecosystem health impact, 645–7estuarine nutrient inputs, 537, 537
fossil record, 627
habitat restoration, 187–90
hydrological cycle perturbation, 543lake nutrient budgets, 536management strategies, 186–7
pressures/state/response, 645, 646
nitrogen cycle perturbation, 544, 545–6
phosphorus cycle perturbation, 543–4,
544
species invasions management, 190–2sulfur cycle perturbation, 544, 546
sustainability, 439–40terrestrial communities nutrient input,
528
human disease organisms, 190human population
density, 136, 137
growth, 186, 186
survivorship curves, 100, 101
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 724SUBJECT INDEX 725
humidity, 30
species distribution, 47
temperature interaction, 46–7
hummingbird pollinators, 389
hybridization, 5, 10hydrogen sulﬁde, 546hydrological cycle, 542, 543
hydrosphere, 526
hydrothermal vents, 40–1, 58, 569, 575hydroxamic acid, 268
ice ages, 613, 627
forest refuges, 18
glacier retreat, 479Pleistocene glacial cycles, 17, 17–18
ideal free distribution, 293–5, 294
immigration, 163, 176, 177
island biogeography ‘equilibrium’ theory,
614, 614, 615
island species richness, 617–18, 619
immobilization of nutrient elements, 326immune response, 353, 353, 354, 354, 355,
356, 366
immunization programs, 367–8, 368
inbreeding, 173
avoidance, 176depression, 173, 173
small populations, 206, 207
incidence functions, 620, 621
individuals, 89–94
counting methods, 94–5variation, 3
industrial melanism, 8, 8–9, 9
infection, 347
host susceptibility/resistance following
(S-I-R models), 353–4
immune response, 352–3, 354, 353, 354,
355, 356
invertebrate defenses, 352mean intensity, 361morbidity effects, 365parasite defenses, 353population dynamics, 365–71prevalence, 361see also disease; microparasites
inﬂuenza, 190inhibition, 87inoculation, biological control, 447, 448inorganic herbicides, 441inorganic insecticides, 441insect growth regulators, 441
insecticides, 441
integrated pest management, 449
persistence, 442secondary pest resurgence, 444
toxicity to nontarget organisms, 442, 444
insectivores, 25
insects
biological control agents, 447, 447, 448
biting, 266
body size constraints, 127body temperature control, 35
clutch size, 123density-dependent population size, 414diapause, 171disease vectors, 219–20dispersal, 163, 164, 165, 176
sex-related differences, 176
eggs, 171fossil record of taxon richness, 626, 627
gall-forming, 266heat tolerance, 39leaf-mining, 266, 268metamorphosis, 89mycetocyte symbioses, 394–5parasitoids seeparasitoids
pests, 413, 414phytophagous, 84, 85, 85, 270, 270, 278,
278, 552, 552, 571, 584, 627
plant defenses, 10, 268
plant/animal macroparasites, 349pollinators, 389–90social parasitism, 350successional species-richness gradients,
625, 625
wood decomposing activities, 335, 335
insulation, 35–6integrated farming systems (IFS), 449, 449
integrated pest management, 448–9, 449
interactions, 27, 225–6interference, 132–3, 232
parasitoids (pesudo-interference), 295,
295
predators, 293, 294
territorality, 154
intermediate disturbance hypothesis, 490
International Biological Programme (IBP),
499
intertidal areas, 48–9
exposure, 48, 49, 50
rocky habitats, 49salinity, 48, 49
substrate effects, 48, 49zonation, 49, 49–50
see also rocky shore
intertidal organisms, 5intrinsic rate of natural increase ( r), 107,
151inundation biological control, 447, 448invasions, 641
biotic resistance hypothesis, 642, 642
climate change impact, 218–21dynamics, 180human activities-related, 186, 187, 203,
205
biosecurity priorities, 194–6, 201economic impact, 190, 191
management strategies, 190–2niche opportunity, 191–2pathways, 199predicting spread, 199–201, 201
meltdown hypothesis, 641, 642
mosquito disease vectors, 219–20salmonids in streams/lakes, 640–2, 641
see also exotic invaders
invertebrate drift, 165invertebrates
detritivores, 329, 330, 330, 331
cellulolysis, 338feces consumption, 340, 340–1, 534
freshwater, 332, 332, 333, 534
fossil record of taxon richness, 626, 627
photosynthetic symbionts, 395–7response to infection, 352species richness, 622species turnover, 619–20stream benthos, discharge disturbance
response, 18
iron, 527, 528
ocean productivity limitation, 512, 514
addition experiments, 539, 542
island populations, 613–21
conservation management applications,
649
disharmony, 620
endemic species, 620–1, 621
‘equilibrium’ theory (MacArthur and
Wilson), 613–15, 614
evolutionary processes, 620–1
extinctions, 203, 209, 559–60feral cat erradication programs, 579, 
579
habitat diversity, 615–16
historical factors, 13negative associations (‘checkerboard’
distributions), 561–3, 562
new island of Surtsey, 618, 619
parasite transmission models, 357
remoteness, 616–18, 619
speciation, 11, 13species–area relationships, 613, 613–15
species turnover, 618–20
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 725726 SUBJECT INDEX
isolation
island populations, 11, 13
speciation, 13
species richness inﬂuence, 603
isotherms, 41, 44, 45
iteroparity, 111, 124
age-/stage-related fecundity, 104, 105,
105
age-related disperal, 176
evolution, 121–2, 122
life cycle, 96, 97
perennial plants, 102
Janzen–Connel effect, 360juvenile hormone analogs, 441
Kselection, 123–5, 125, 126, 130–1, 589
Kspecies, 180
succession, 486
kvalues, 99, 100, 100
competition quantiﬁcation, 142–5, 144,
145
effects on fecundity/growth, 145, 145
models, 147, 148
key factor analysis, 415, 416, 416, 417,
418, 419
keratin decomposition, 344
key factor analysis, 415–19
density-dependent/regulatory processes,
416–17, 417
discrete/overlapping generations, 419kvalues, 415, 416, 416, 417, 418, 419
life table data, 415, 415, 416, 418, 421, 422
limitations, 419regression coefﬁcients, 416
keystone species, 584–5, 593
La Niña, 41, 42
Lack clutch size, 122–3, 123
lacunarity, 463, 463
lakes, 613
benthic detritivore communities, 333
endemic species, 621eutrophication biomanipulation, 643, 643
hydrological cycle, 542nutrient budgets, 534–7, 535
phosphorus, 545primary productivity, 502
latitudinal trends, 501nutrient availability, 512–13, 513
resource competition, 264, 265
rotifer communities, 476, 477
saline, 536salinity effects, 580, 580salmonid invasions, 641–2
species richness
depth gradients, 624
primary productivity relationship, 608,
608
stratiﬁcation, 69, 70
water acidiﬁcation, 51–2, 53
lambda ( λ), 419
lambda ( λ)-contribution analysis, 419, 421–2
sensitivities, 419, 422
land mass movements, 13, 15
land-use change, 184–5, 499, 547
larval dispersal, 165, 489latitudinal gradients
detritivores, 331, 331
primary productivity, 501, 501, 501
species richness, 603, 622, 622–3
temperature, 41
leaching of nutrients, 327, 526
lead contamination, 188
leaf area index, 140, 140
leaf litter seelitter
learned behavior, foraging, 292, 293, 295
leaves, 92, 241
daily movements, 62dead matter decomposition, 334–5desert plants, 35nitrogen content, 66photosynthetic capacity, 63, 66projection efﬁciency, 66radiation exposure, 59, 60, 62seasonal shedding, 60, 62shading effects, 62sun versus shade, 62–3, 66, 66
water conservation, 68
Legionnaires’ disease, 366
legumes, nitrogen ﬁxation, 545
nitrate leaching, 644nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria, 528
rhizobia mutualism, 402–3
leprosy, 653lichens, 400–1, 401
mycobiont component, 400phytobiont component, 400
life cycle graphs, 108, 108, 109
life cycles, 95–7, 96
annual species, 98–101repeatedly breeding individuals, 102–5stages, 89
life form spectra, 24–5, 26
life histories, 96
age at maturity, 119, 121, 121
allometric constraints, 126–9, 127
components, 110–11evolution, 110–16
ﬁtness contours, 117, 117, 118
habitat relationships, 110, 117, 130option sets, 117, 117–18
phenotypic plasticity, 125–6, 126
phylogenetic constraints, 126, 129–31
r/Kselection, 123–5, 130–1
reproductive allocation (reproductive
effort), 111, 119, 120
reproductive value, 111–12, 112, 113, 115
trade-offs, 112–15, 114, 117, 121
cost of reproduction (CR), 115, 115
number/ﬁtness of offspring, 116, 116
life history traits
applied ecology, 187, 194–7
biosecurity priorities for invasive species,
194–6
conservation predictors, 196–7habitat restoration predictors, 194, 195
harvest management priorities, 196–7natural selection, 110, 118, 126
life tables, 97, 98, 107
age classes, 98, 98
construction, 98–9intrinsic rate of natural increase ( r
)
calculation, 107, 108
key factor analysis, 415, 415, 416, 418,
421, 422
lambda ( λ)-contribution analysis, 421,
421–2
modular organisms, 104–5, 106
repeatedly breeding individuals, 102, 103,
103
static, 103–4, 104, 106
lifespan, 110
plant chemical defenses (apparency
theory), 84
resource-use patterns, 79
light seesolar radiation
lightening strike, 545
forest gaps creation, 493, 495
lignin, 79, 82, 83, 385, 520
decomposers, 328, 329digestion, 337, 338, 393
limiting factors, terrestrial primary
productivity, 505–11
limits to similarity, 550, 605lindane, 441lithosphere, 526litter, 487, 500
decomposition, 328–9, 329, 333, 334
detritivore consumption, 337–9, 338, 339,
340
lizard species richness, 622
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 726SUBJECT INDEX 727
Llanos, 68
logistic equation, 150–1, 151, 181
interspeciﬁc competition, 234
Lotka–Volterra model, 234–7, 238, 239,
257, 298–9, 300, 307, 314
crowding effects, 304–7, 306
environmental heterogeneity
incorporation, 312
ratio-dependent predation, 304
zero isoclines, 235, 235– 6, 236
lower input farming and environment
(LIFE), 449
Lyme disease, 360, 639
MacArthur’s fraction model, 472
macroalgal beds, 522macroecology, 602–3macrofauna, terrestrial decomposers, 330,
331, 334
macroinvertebrate community index (MCI),
646, 647
macronutrients (plants), 75macroparasites, 347, 348
crop pathogen population dynamics,
368–9, 369
directly transmitted, 369–70immune response, 353indirectly transmitted, 370
magnesium, 527, 528, 536malaria, 7, 349, 352, 369, 571malathion, 441mammals
age-biased disperal, 176body size constraints, 127coprophagy/refection, 341, 392ectoparasite specialization, 352
extinctions, 203, 627, 628
fossil record of taxon richness, 626, 627
gut symbiont microﬂora, 391
nitrogen ﬁxation, 402
immune response, 352life history traits, 129, 129–30, 130
locomotory/feeding habits, 25, 27
parallel evolution, 19–20, 21
population size (abundance) regulation,
415
scavenging detritivores, 343sex-biased dispersal, 176species richness, 612, 622temperature regulation, 35territorality, 176
management, 633–58
biodiversity, 647–52ecosystem health, 645–7ecosystem processes in agriculture, 644–5
eutrophication biomanipulation, 643, 643
food web manipulation, 640–7
succession manipulation, 634–40
agroecosystems, 634–5
conservation, 639restoration, 637–9
manganese, 528
mangrove, 522
economic aspects, 654, 655
gaps colonization, 493, 495, 495
island communities, 615
species turnover, 619–20
maquis, 23–4marginal value theorem, 289–92, 290, 291,
292
marine biomes, 24marine environments
detritivores/decomposers, 335interspeciﬁc competition, 551osmoregulation, 48plant matter decomposition, 336, 337, 337
sea-bed carrion scavengers, 345
marine protected areas, 647–8Markov models, succession, 483, 484
marsupials, 19–20, 21
pollinators, 389
mast seeding, 114, 168, 276–7, 277
maternal effect model, 434, 434
mathmatical modeling, 145–6maximum sustainable yield, 451, 451–2
Mayr–Dobzhansky test, 9measles, 347, 366, 367, 370–1, 371
stochastic fade-out, 370
megafauna, terrestrial decomposers, 330mesofauna, terrestrial decomposers, 330,
330, 331
metabolic water, 73
metabolism
cold tolerance, 37
decomposers, 327–8dormanct stages, 37endotherms, 35green plants, 58
gut mutualistic microbiota, 391, 392, 393temperature effects, 33, 33–4
metal pollution, 40, 50–1
habitat restoration, 187–8tolerance, 187, 188
metapopulations, 176, 177, 180–5
biological control strategies, 462–3concept, 180conservation, 217–18, 218, 219
deﬁnition, 181–2development of theory, 180–1dynamics, 183–5ﬁshery reserve networks design, 463,
465, 465
habitable patches as islands, 180Levins’ model, 180–1parasites, 357, 370–1plants, 182predator–prey interactions, 315–16, 317,
317–18, 319–20
stability/persistence, 181, 181, 183, 
184–5
alternative stable equilibria, 183
subpopulation asynchrony, 181subpopulation colonizations, 180, 181subpopulation extinctions, 180, 181, 208,
209, 209
habitat destruction, 177, 177
see also patches/patchiness
meteor strike, 479methamidophos, 449methane, 53, 53, 54, 530
methanogenic bacteria, 328methoprene, 441methoxychlor, 4412-methyl-4,6-dinitrophenol, 442metribuzin, 442microbivores, 326, 327, 329, 330
assimilation efﬁciency (AE), 520community trophic structure, 518
microclimates, 609
carbon dioxide levels, 69
relative humidity, 46–7variation, 41, 45
microcosm experiments
community response to disturbance
sequence, 497, 497
dead matter decomposition, 334
phytoplankton community structure,
551, 551
microfauna, terrestrial decomposers, 330,
330, 331, 332, 334
microhabitats, 550, 609
niche differentiation, 561
microparasites, 347, 348
basic reproductive rate ( R
0), 365
critical population size, 365–6, 367direct transmission, 365–6
cycles of infection, 367, 367
epidemic curve, 366, 366–7
frequency-dependent transmission, 368
herd immunity, 367immune response, 353
immunization programs, 367–8, 368
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 727728 SUBJECT INDEX
microparasites (Cont’d)
morbidity effects, 365
persisitent infections, 366, 367
population dynamics of infection, 365–71
transmission threshold, 365vector-borne infections, 369see also disease; infection
microsatellite DNA analysis, 11
microtine rodent population cycles, 305,
425, 425, 433–7, 435
migration, 89, 187
deﬁnition, 163habitat patches, 489
habitat restoration, 197–9, 200
long-distance, 169–70
one-way, 170–1patterns, 168–71predator foraging costs, 295, 296
predator–prey population dynamics, 315,
316
migratory species
conservation, 201–3nature reserves, 202–3
mildews, 349mimicry, 86mineral nutrients, 76
plants, 58, 75–8, 77
primary productivity relationship
lakes, 512–13, 513
oceans, 513–15terrestrial environments, 505, 507, 510
soil pH effects, 47, 47
see also nutrient budgets; nutrient cycling
mineralization, 326
dead matter decomposition, 334
minimum viable population (MVP), 209,
210, 213
mining damage, 186
habitat restoration, 187–8
mites, temperature-dependent
growth/development, 33, 34
mitochondial evolution, 408mobile organisms, 5modular organisms, 89–92
chemical defenses, 274clonal dispersal, 166competition, 142, 143, 166
growth forms, 91, 92, 92
guerilla forms, 166integration, 93–4, 94
life table construction, 104–5
modular growth schedule, 105
phalanx forms, 166population size, 92response to parasites, 354
senescence, 92–3, 93
monoculture, parasite infection
transmission, 360
monophagous species, 79, 278, 279
monuron, 442morphological differences, niche
differentiation, 559–61
mortality/mortality rate, 89, 95
counting deaths, 95
density-dependence, 134–5, 135, 138, 138,
140
kvalues (killing power), 99, 100
competition effects quantiﬁcation, 143,
144
life tables construction, 99plant herbivory impact, 271–2, 272
survivorship curves, 100, 100
mound-builders, 575mountain tops, 613mouthparts, 79mudﬂat communities, 576, 576
Mullerian mimicry, 86multiple equilibria, harvest management,
454, 454–5
munition dump restoration, 188mussel beds, gaps formation/colonization,
492–3, 493, 494
mutual antagonism/interference, 238–9
predator–prey interactions, 304, 305, 307
mutualism, 27, 225, 226, 326, 345, 381–
409
deﬁnition, 381detritivore cellulolysis, 338facultative, 338farming activities, 385–7fungivores, 329gut inhabitants, 391–3insect mycetocytes, 394–5mathmatical models, 406–7, 407
obligate, 338photosynthetic symbionts, 395–7plants
decomposers, 336fungi, 396–400nitrogen ﬁxation, 401–6
pollination, 387–91, 406–7, 407
protectors, 382–5seed dispersal, 164–5, 387–9, 388
subcellular structures evolution, 407–8,
408
mycorrhizas, 74, 397–400, 398
arbuscular, 397, 399–400, 399, 487, 488,
645ectomycorrhizas, 397–9ericoid, 397
myxomatosis, 185, 378, 378–9
natural experiments, 250–1
interspeciﬁc competition, 253–4, 255
natural selection, 3–4, 10
life history traits, 110, 118, 126polymorphisms maintenance, 7–8
nature reserves seeconservation reserves
necromass, 486–7necrotrophic parasites, 326nectar, 327, 383, 387, 389nectar-feeders, 493, 584nectaries, 389–90negative binomial model, 312nematodes
animal macroparasites, 349, 352, 354,
356, 357, 363, 429, 571
host population dynamics, 373–6, 374,
375, 376
red grouse, 373, 374
Svarlbard reindeer, 373, 375–6, 376
detritivores, 330, 331, 332microbivores, 329plant parasites, 354
virus transmission, 349
net ecosystem productivity (NEP), 500net primary productivity (NPP), 500
standing crop biomass relationship
(NPP : B ratios), 504–5
net recruitment curves, 140, 140
niche, 31, 32
breadth, 603competitive exclusion versus coexistence,
237–8
complementarity, 553–4, 629dimensions, 31endangered species, 193expansion, competitive release, 251, 252fundamental, 31, 46, 237n-dimensional hypervolume, 31, 87
opportunity, 191–2ordination technique for display, 190
canonical correspondence analysis,
190, 190
packing, 550
realized, 31, 46, 237, 286–7
predation constraints, 286–7sympatric/allopatric populations, 251
resource dimensions, 87–8
resource management aspects, 186, 187–93
species abundance models, 472
succession mechanisms, 483–4
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 728SUBJECT INDEX 729
niche differentiation, 28, 253–4, 553–9
coexistence, 242, 243, 245, 256–8, 259,
263–4, 553, 556–7
Competitive Exclusion Principle, 238
environmental conditions, 259exploitation mechanisms, 258–65morphological differences, 559–61niche complementarity, 553–4, 629
null models, 556–9parasite specialization, 355resource partitioning, 259resource-utilization curves, 257, 257–8
selection experiments, 255, 256, 257
size ratios of adjacent species, 560spatial partitioning, 259, 555temporal partitioning, 259, 554–6
Nicholson–Bailey model, 301–2, 312, 315
crowding effects, 305
nicotine, 441nitrates
formation in soil, 644groundwater pollution, 644leaching, 644–5plant root foraging, 76
nitroanalines, 442nitrogen, 86
agricultural discharges, 644–5arbuscular mycorrhiza-related availability,
399
atmospheric, 526, 527availability to herbivores, 278decomposition processes, 336ectomycorrhiza-related availability, 398ericoid mycorrhiza-related availability,
400
estuaries, 537exploitive competition, 260–1, 261, 262
lakes, 536ocean, 538–9
continental shelf region, 538upwellings, 538, 539
plants/decomposers competition, 336–7primary production limitation, 510, 512species richness effects, 608, 609, 609
tundra plant uptake, 555–6, 558
nitrogen cycle, 543, 545–6
human activities perturbation, 544, 
545–6
nitrogen ﬁxation, 401–6, 528, 532, 545
bacterial symbionts, 402global increases, 645, 645
leguminous plants, energy costs, 402–3lichen cyanobacterium phytobiont, 400nitrate leaching, 644nonleguminous plants, 403–4
ocean, 539termite gut microbiota, 394
nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria, 528
see also rhizobial nitrogen-ﬁxation
nitrogen-ﬁxing mutualisms
ecological succession, 406–7
interspeciﬁc competition, 404–5, 405
nitrogen oxides, 546
nitrogenase, 402, 528nitrophenol herbicides, 442nitrosamines, 643nitrous oxide, 53
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), 41, 43,
44, 428
number of offspring
clutch size, 122–3
ﬁtness trade-off, 116, 116, 122
nutrient budgets, 527, 527
aquatic communities, 533–9inputs/outputs, 527terrestrial communities, 527–33wetfall/dryfall, 528, 529
nutrient cycling, 326, 525–49, 641
energy ﬂux relationship, 525–6, 526
species richness effects, 627, 628
ocean, 24
benthic communities, 521
detritivores, 333
carbon dioxide uptake, 54, 548core oxygen isotope analysis, 17, 17
euphotic zone, 513hydrological cycle, 542nutrient budgets, 538–9, 540, 541
continental shelf region, 538
phosphorus, 543, 544, 545primary productivity, 500–1, 504, 514
biomass relationship, 504nutrient availability, 501, 513–15solar radiation, 514, 514–15
temperature, 514, 514–15
upwellings, 513–14, 538, 539
offspring size/numbers trade-off, 116, 116,
122
old-ﬁeld succession, 482, 482, 487
oligophagous species, 278, 279omnivores/omnivory, 266, 598, 598
onchocerciasis, 369opportunists, desert biomes, 24optimal defense theory, 83
optimal foraging theory, 282–5
patch use, 288–93
optimal similarity, 550optimization approach, life history
evolution, 110
option sets, 117, 117–18
ordination technique, niche display, 190
organic arsenicals, 442organism-weighted density, 136organisms, 1organophosphates, 441, 444, 449
resistance, 446
osmoregulation, 48
outbreaks (of abundance), 320, 321, 323
outbreeding, 173
depression, 173, 173
overexploitation, 205, 450owl predation, 287, 310oxygen, 78
isotope analysis, 17, 17
parallel evolution, 19–20, 21
paraquat, 442parasite-mediated coexistence, 571–2, 572
parasites, 79, 225, 266, 347–80, 381, 565
aggregated distribution, 361, 362
biotrophic, 352brood, 350, 350–1
community structure inﬂuence, 550,
571–3, 574–5, 576
competition
asymmetric interspeciﬁc, 233within hosts, 355–6, 357
diversity, 347–51food chain length, 595host coevolution, 351, 352, 378–9, 379,
380
host detrimental effects, 361–5, 362
host growth/behavior change induction,
354
host habitat speciﬁcity, 352host immune response, 366host interactions, 27, 226, 351–6
apparent competition, 245, 246
population dynamics, 365–70, 371–8,
372, 423
host resistance/immunity, 352–3
S-I-R models, 353–4
host speciﬁcity, 351–2, 352
intermediate hosts, 348, 349, 357
control measures, 370
island biogeography, 620macroparasites, 347, 348, 349–50
metapopulations, 357, 370–1microparasites, 347, 348, 349
natural/accidental hosts, 352necrotrophic, 326, 352
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 729730 SUBJECT INDEX
parasites (Cont’d)
social, 350
species richness inﬂuence, 603
transmission, 358–61
contact rate, 358
density-dependent, 358–60dynamics, 358frequency-dependent, 358–60, 359
host diversity effects, 360, 360–1
local hot spots, 359, 359–60
transmission coefﬁcient, 358, 365
vectors, 348, 349, 357, 369
parasitoid–host interactions
aggregated distribution, 312, 313, 313–14,
314, 315
aggregation of risk, 312–13, 314, 314,
318, 320,321
coupled oscillations, 298
one-generation cycles, 302, 303
practical demonstration, 302, 303
environmental heterogeneity effects, 312,
313, 315, 317
functional responses, 313–14population dynamics
delayed density dependence, 300, 301
Nicholson–Bailey model, 301–2, 305
parasitoids, 266, 267, 279
foraging
density dependence, 288
interference, 295, 295
marginal value theorem, 291, 292, 292
mechanistic models, 293
parathion, 441partial refuges, 310, 312, 319, 321
patches/patchiness, 7, 167, 176
biological control strategies, 462–3coexistence facilitation, 553colonization through dispersal, 176–7communities
distribution, 176–7, 478dynamics, 489–96
endangered species habitat fragments, 208
ephemeral, 241food distribution, 287foraging, 287–95
abandonment of unproﬁtable patches,
287–8, 289, 289
area-restricted search, 287, 288location, 287marginal value theorem, 289–92, 290,
291, 292
optimal foraging approach, 288–93predation risk, 291–2predator aggregative response, 287,
288, 288predator interference competition, 293
predator migration cost, 295, 296
stay-time, 289, 291
interspeciﬁc competition, 239
aggregated distributions, 241–4, 242
islands models, 180
metapopulations concept, 180parasite–host models, 357
predator–prey interactions, 311, 316–17,
317
sink (receiver) patches, 181, 184source (donor) patches, 181, 184subpopulation extinctions, 176, 208, 209,
209
uninhabited patches, 180see also environmental heterogeneity
pathogens, 347peat bog lakes, 340permafrost, 21, 22permanent wilting point, 74permethrin, 441pertussis (whooping cough), 367, 367
pest control, 439–50
biological control, 447–8chemical pesticides, 441–4early control of invaders, 449–50integrated management, 448–9, 449
target pest resurgence, 442, 443
pest species, 440
economic injury level, 440, 440
economic thresholds, 440–1natural enemies, 442secondary pests, 444
pesticides
resistance, 445–6, 446
see also
herbicides; insecticides
pesudo-interference, 294–5
pH, 30, 31
soil, 47
water, 47–8
pollution-related acidiﬁcation, 51–2, 53
phanerophytes, 25phenol derivative herbicides, 442
phenotypic plasticity, 125–6, 126
phenoxy weed killers, 442pheromone insecticides, 441philopatry, 174–5, 176phlorotannins, 268, 269
phosphorus, 527, 528, 530
arbuscular mycorrhiza-related availability,
399, 399–400
ectomycorrhiza-related availability,
398
ericoid mycorrhiza-related availability,
400eutrophication management, 642interspeciﬁc competition, 264, 265
lakes, 536ocean, 538–9
continental shelf region, 538
plants/decomposers competition, 337primary production limitation, 510, 
512
soil availability, 78, 78
species richness effects, 608
phosphorus cycle, 543–5
human activities perturbation, 543–4, 
544
photoinhibition, 59, 87photoperiod, 41, 97
germination stimulation following
dormancy, 172
predictive diapause, 171
photorespiration
C
3pathway, 70
C4pathway, 71
photosynthesis, 58, 59, 500
algal symbionts, 395–7
aquatic habitats, 63
C3pathway, 68, 70–1
C4pathway, 68, 70, 71
carbon cycle, 525, 547
carbon dioxide, 69–73
compensation point, 63, 71
crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM), 68,
70, 71
efﬁciency, 507, 507, 511
gross primary productivity, 500
net rate, 63, 65, 66
photoinhibition, 59, 87productivity assessment methods, 499radiation utilization efﬁciency, 66rate, 71
stomatal opening, 67, 68–9
water requirement, 67–9, 507wavebands, 59see also primary productivity
photosynthetic capacity, 63, 66photosynthetic pigments, 63
absorption spectra, 64
photosynthetically active radiation (PAR),
59, 62, 66
phyllosphere, 327phylogenetic analysis, morphological
differences in niche differentiation,560–1, 561
phylogeny, 5
life history inﬂuences, 126, 129–31
physical defenses, 83phytoaccumulation, 188
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 730SUBJECT INDEX 731
phytoplankton
absorption spectra, 65
community structure, 551, 551
consumption efﬁciency (CE), 519, 519
decomposition, 328, 329, 335
diurnal movements, 169energy ﬂow, 521, 521
eutrophication, 545
biomanipulation, 643
light penetration attenuation, 60, 62, 62
nutrient cycling
estuaries, 537
lakes, 534
ocean, 537, 539
primary productivity, 502, 504–5
depth relationship, 515, 516
iron limitation, 539, 542
oceans, 514, 514
zooplankton productivity relationship,
516, 517
resource competition, 264, 265
seasonal succession, 612
silicon cycling, 328species coexistence, 241trophic cascades, 580, 580
phytoremediation, 188phytostabilization, 188phytotransformation, 188plague, 352, 640plant pathogens, 266
crop plants, 368–9, 369
herbivore vectors, 271
plants
allelopathy, 232–3annuals, 67, 96, 97
ant mutualisms, 383–5, 384
apparent competition, 246–7atmospheric nutrient losses, 530carbon : nitrogen ratios, 79, 80carnivorous, 266chemical defenses, 83–5, 85
climbing structures, 19, 19
coexistence
aggregations, 242–3, 243, 244
exploitation of single resource,
259–61, 261, 262
competition, 140
asymmetric, 233experimental approaches, 248–9interspeciﬁc, 229, 233, 238, 248–9, 271
root/shoot interdependence, 233–4, 234
constant ﬁnal yield, 141–2, 143, 144
decomposition, 329, 331
biochemical composition inﬂuence,
336, 337dead matter, 333, 334, 334–5
decomposer mutualism, 336, 337
detritus, consumption, 337–9, 338
dormancy, 171–3
dynamic thinning lines, 156–8facilitative interactions, 577fossil record of taxon richness, 626, 627
fungal mutualisms, 381–2, 396–400
fungal parasites, 357, 359, 360
macroparasites, 349, 352, 354microparasites, 389
gall formation, 354gaps colonization, 240–1
heavy metals tolerance, 187, 188
herbivory compensation (tolerance),
267
defoliation responses, 270, 270–1, 271
herbivory defenses, 10, 268–70, 269, 584
herbivory impact
fecundity, 272–4survival, 271–2, 272
high temperature adaptations, 39holo/hemiparasitic, 349–50human activities-related invaders, 190–1,
191
hybridization, 5
intertidal areas/submerged communities,
49
leaf modiﬁcations, 20
local adaptation, 5, 6
mast years, 276–7, 277
meristem protection, 39, 79, 83
grazing tolerance, 271
metapopulations, 182microhabitats, 550micronutrient composition, 73, 73
mineral nutrients, 75–8modular organization, 89, 92, 142, 143
necrotrophic parasites, 352
nitrogen-ﬁxing mutualisms, 401–6
rhizobia, 402–3
nutrient foraging, 293
nutritional content, 79–80, 81
digestion/assimilation, 82–3
parasite defenses, 353
morphogenetic response, 354resistant cultivars, 360, 360
permanent wilting point, 74photosynthesis, 58, 59photosynthetic niche, 32
phyllosphere, 327physical defenses, 83pollination, 389–91population viability analysis (PVA),
216–17r/Kselection, 124, 125
radiation utilization efﬁciency, 66Raunkiaer’s life form spectra, 24–5, 26
rhizosphere, 327root systems, 75, 76, 77, 78
seed dispersal seeseed dispersal
self-thinning, 156–61, 159
soil/water pH effects, 47, 47
spatial/temporal niche differentiation,
259, 259–60
species/population boundary lines,
158–9
species richness
altitude gradients, 624island size effects, 616productivity relationship, 608spatial heterogeneity effects, 609, 610
successional gradients, 625
sun versus shade, 62–3, 66, 66–8, 67
survivorship curves, 100, 101
temperature regulation, 35
tundra, resource partitioning, 555–6, 
558
virus transmission, 349water loss to atmosphere, 75
water movements, 543water uptake, 73–5
saline conditions, 48
see also crop plants
‘playing dead’, 86
Pleistocene glacial cycles, 17, 17–18
polar desert, 21
decomposers, 331
polar ice caps, 542
polar species richness, 613pollen feeders, 389, 390pollen record analysis, 17, 17–18
pollination
brood site, 390, 390–1
herbivory-related, 272–3mutualisms, 387–91
mathematical models, 406–7, 407
pollution, 30, 31, 50–2, 186, 202
agricultural nitrates, 644atmospheric, 545, 546industrial gases, 52–4industrial melanism, 8, 8–9, 9
phosphorus, 644tolerance, 51
polymorphism, 6
dispersal variability, 175industrial melanism, 9
maintenance by natural selection, 7–8
transient, 6–7, 9
polyols, 37, 48
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 731732 SUBJECT INDEX
polyphagous species (generalists), 79, 278,
279, 285
polyphenols, 533
population, 94
boundary lines, 158–9
crashes, 320, 324cycles seeabundance cycles
divergence, 5
increase rates, 105–10persistence time ( T), 212–13
size determination, 94–5
population density, 94, 135–7, 136
competition in regulation, 138–41, 139,
153
deﬁnitions, 136growth curves, 140–1, 141
net recruitment curves, 140, 140
yield relationship
law of constant ﬁnal yield, 141–2, 143,
144
self-thinning, 156–7, 160
population dynamics
Allee effect, 310crop pathogens, 368–9, 369
dispersal effects, 176–8functional responses, 307–11
type 1, 307, 307
type 2, 307–8, 307, 310
type 3, 308–9, 309
mathematical models, 147–8, 149, 149
metapopulations, 183–5microparasite infection, 365–71
epidemics, 354
parasite impact on host populations,
371–8, 372
parasite transmission, 358parasitoid–host interactions see
parasitoid–host interactions
predation, 297–325predator–prey interactions see
predator–prey interactions
prey populations, 274–6rare species, 204small populations, 203, 207–9
conservation activities, 187
see also abundance
population growth
competition models, 146, 146–9, 148
ﬂuctuations, 147–8, 149, 149
logistic equation, 150–1, 151
time lags incorporation, 147–8
density-dependent, 141–2exponential, 146, 146, 151
food availability relationship, 422, 422fundamental net per capita rate ( R), 106,
146
human populations, 186, 186
intrinsic rate of natural increase ( r), 107
r/Kselection, 124
population projection matrices, 108–10,
109, 419
population size
estimation, 410modular organisms, 92persistence time ( T) relationship, 213,
213
see also abundance
population viability analysis (PVA), 209–17
biogeographical data, 210, 209–11
decision analysis, 211, 211–12
limitations, 217
simulation modeling, 213–17, 214, 215,
215, 216
subjective expert assessment, 211–12
potassium, 86, 527, 528, 530
species richness effects, 608
potential evapotranspiration (PET), 606
species richness inﬂuence, 606, 607
prairies, 23
precipitation, 542
abundance determinant, 428, 428
acid rain, 546mineral nutrient wetfall, 528primary productivity relationship, 507–8,
508
annual variations, 524, 523–4
rainout component, 528species richness inﬂuence, 606–7washout component, 528
predation, 225, 264, 266–96, 565
community structure inﬂuence, 550,
566–71, 575, 576
deﬁnition, 266physical defenses, 83population dynamics, 297–325prey population effects, 274–6ratio-dependent, 304reciprocal, 238–9, 239
species richness inﬂuence, 603, 605
predation risk, 310, 311, 317–18, 319, 322
density-dependence, 294, 311foraging, patch use, 291–2parasite burden relationship, 363
predator-mediated coexistence, 568, 569predator–prey interactions, 226
aggregative responses, 311–12, 315apparent competition (for enemy-free
space), 244–8, 245, 247, 260continuous-time models, 314–15coupled oscillations, 297, 298, 299, 324
ﬁeld experiments, 303one-generation cycles, 302, 303
practical demonstration, 302–3time-delayed ‘numerical responses’,
299–300, 301
crowding effects, 303–7, 306
delayed density-dependence, 299–301,
301
dispersal model, 315–16, 316
environmental heterogeneity effects, 311,
312, 316–20, 317
frequency-dependent selection, 7
functional responses, 307–11
type 1, 306, 307
type 2, 307–8, 307, 311
type 3, 308–11, 309
harvest management, 459–60, 460
Lotka–Volterra model, 298–9, 300, 304–7
metapopulations, 315–16, 317, 317–18,
319–20
mutual interference, 304, 305, 307
population dynamics, 297
modeling approaches, 297
multiple equilibria, 321–4, 323
stabilizing effects of self-limitation, 305
ratio-dependent predation, 304selﬁsh herd principle, 168species that are both predators and prey,
303
predators, 79, 266
aggregated distribution, 287, 288, 293,
295
behavioral determinants, 287–8
biological control agents, 423, 422–4
classiﬁcation, 266
diet width, 278–9effects of consumption, 276–8
food chain length, 595, 597–8
food webs, 583, 584
indirect effects, 579, 579
keystone species, 584trophic cascades, 580–1, 582
handling time, 279, 307, 308, 309
ideal free distribution, 293–5interference competition, 293, 294island biogeography, 620learning, 295
necrotrophic parasites, 352
optimal foraging theory, 283patchy food distribution, 287, 288prey switching, 308, 309, 570, 571satiation, 276, 277, 278
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 732SUBJECT INDEX 733
search time, 307–8, 309
see also predator–prey interactions
prey, 266
Allee effect, 310, 311
apparent competition (for enemy-free
space), 244–8, 245, 246, 247, 605
consumer preferences, 279
switching, 281–2, 308, 309, 570, 571
consumer ‘search image’, 281
food web indirect effects, 579, 579
limits to similarity, 605population effects of predation, 274–6,
275
competition reduction, 274–5
predation risk seepredation risk
see also predator–prey interactions
primary productivity, 500–5
autochthonous/allochthonous, 500, 502biomass relationship, 504–5, 505, 505,
506, 506
carbon cycling, 525gross, 500latitudinal trends, 501, 501, 501
growing season duration, 509–10, 510
limiting factors
aquatic communities, 512–15terrestrial communities, 505–11
net, 500
global levels, 500, 500
seasonal/annual trends, 501–2, 502
secondary productivity relationship,
516–17, 517
solar radiation relationship, 501see also photosynthesis
proctodeal trophallaxis, 338production efﬁciency (PE), 519, 520productivity, 499
assessment methods, 499food webs, 595–7, 596
net ecosystem, 500primary seeprimary productivity
secondary, 500, 516
primary production relationship,
516–17, 517
species richness, 603, 605–9, 627, 629,
629, 630, 631
tropical rainforest, 24
propanil, 442protected areas, 647, 647
complementarity, 649–50, 650
economic perspective, 654
irreplaceability, 649, 650
multipurpose design, 651–2, 651, 652
prioritization, 649protists, temperature-dependent
growth/development, 33, 34
protozoans
cellulases, 338
detritivores, 330, 331, 332digestive mutualism, 338
ruminants, 392termites, 393
vertebrates, 391
interspeciﬁc competition, 229–30, 237microbivores, 329microparasites, 349persisitent infections, 366, 367
pseudo-interference, 312–13, 314pyrethroids, 441pyrethrum, 441
Q
10,3 3
quadrat, 94–5
R(fundamental net reproductive rate), 106,
196
competition models, 146, 146–9
determination from population
projection matrices, 109, 109
population growth, 106, 146
see also lambda ( λ)
R0(basic reproductive rate), 99, 105–10
microparasite population dynamics, 365
r(intrinsic rate of natural increase), 107, 151
rselection, 123–5, 126, 130–1, 589, 590
rspecies, 180
decomposers, 327
succession, 486
rabies, 376–8
radiation seesolar radiation
rainfall seeprecipitation
ramets, 92
integration, 93–4
random distribution (dispersion), 166, 166,
167
random fraction model, 472range, climate change impact, 218
nature reserve location, 222
rank–abundance diagrams, 472–3, 473, 474
rare species, 204
extinction risk, 204population dynamics, 204
rattan harvesting, 458Raunkiaer’s life form spectra, 24–5, 26
reciprocal transplant experiments, 5, 7reclamation of land, 187
phytoremediation, 188see also habitat restorationrecruitment
curves, 140, 140
habitat patches, 489
red grouse population cycles, 424, 429–31,
431
refection, 393refuges, 310, 312, 317–18, 319, 321
regular distribution (dispersion), 166, 166, 167
remote-sensing techniques, 499remoteness, 618, 619
replacement series experiments, 405, 404–5
reproduction, 10, 89, 92, 95, 97, 110–11
age-speciﬁc, 99, 104, 105, 105
basic rate see R
0
continous breeding, 97
fundamental net rate see R
life history option sets, 117
seasonal activity, 97
theory of natural selection, 3, 4see also fecundity
reproductive allocation (reproductive effort),
111, 111, 116, 119, 120, 121–2
offspring size/numbers, 121–2
r/Kselection, 124
reproductive cost (CR), 115, 115, 117
habitat classiﬁcation, 118, 118–19
optimal clutch size, 123
reproductive isolation, 10reproductive output ( F
x), 99
reproductive value, 111–12, 112, 113, 115
reptiles
extinctions, 205
fossil record of taxon richness, 626
resilience, 586, 590, 593, 593
resistance, 586, 589resistant adults, 171
resource-depletion zones (RDZ), 62, 132
nitrates, 76plant root water uptake, 74, 75soil mineral resources, 75, 78
resource-ratio hypothesis, 485, 485, 486
resource-utilization curves, 257, 257
resource-weighted density, 136, 137resources, 58–88
allocation
phenotypic plasticity, 125–6self-thinning, 161
antagonistic, 87classiﬁcation, 86–8competition, 132
asymmetric, 152–3, 154
complementary, 87consumer relationships, 336essential, 86–7
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 733734 SUBJECT INDEX
resources (Cont’d)
growth isoclines, 86, 87
inhibition, 87
limitation, 414, 414
niche differentiation, 259
niche dimensions, 87–8niche theory, 187–93range, 603
species richness inﬂuence, 605substitutable, 86, 87
respiration, 59, 63
aquatic environments, 78autotrophic, 500
carbon cycle, 547, 548
compensation point, 63, 71ecosystem, 500heterotrophic, 500
respiratory systems, 78response surface analysis, 249–50, 250
restoration ecology, 187–90
succession management, 637–9
rhizobia
legume mutualisms, 402–3, 403, 404
interspeciﬁc competition, 404–5
nitrogen ﬁxation, 402, 645root nodules, 402, 403
rhizomes, 92, 104, 171rhizosphere, 327rice paddy ﬁeld restoration, 637, 638
river blindness, 349, 446, 446
rivers
ecosystem health assessment, 646, 647
habitat restoration, 188–90, 189
discharge levels, 189–90ﬂushing discharges, 189, 190migratory ﬁsh species, 197
human activity-related invaders, 190, 190
hydrological cycle, 542water ﬂow hazards, 50
rocky shore
disturbance events, 479food chains, 595
gap formation/species richness, 490–1, 492
grazing effects on community structure,
566
macroalgal beds, 522mussel bed patch dynamics, 492–3, 493,
494
predator effects, 568, 575succession, 479see also intertidal areas
rodents
desert, 607foraging behavior, 287gut mutualistic microbiota, 391
pesticides resistance, 446plague virulence, 352
pollinators, 389, 389
seed predation, 272
root nodules, 402, 403, 528
roots, 92
competition, 153, 154, 233–4, 234
fungal associations seemycorrhizas
mineral nutrient foraging, 75–6, 78
nutrient uptake, 527, 528oxygen requirements, 78system architecture, 75, 76, 77, 78
water uptake, 73–5, 76
rosettes, 92rotifer community cluster
analysis/canonical correspondenceanalysis, 476, 477
rumen, external/internal, 338ruminants
digestive system, 82–3, 391, 392
methane production, 53
rusts, 350
saline lakes, 536
salinity, 30, 31, 40, 48–50, 49
harsh environments, 611pelagic ecosystem effects, 580, 580
salmon migration, 170salmonids
interspeciﬁc competition, 227, 228, 238
invasions in streams/lakes, 641, 640–2
salt marshes, 49
restoration, 638–9, 639
salt pans, 24, 48sampling effect, 629sampling methods, 95sand dunes, primary succession, 479,
480–2, 481
saprotrophs, 79, 80, 326, 351savannas, 23, 23, 68, 487
net primary productivity, 501
scale, 26
scavenging vertebrates, 342–3schistosomiasis (bilharzia), 349, 370
search
area-restricted, 287–8
feeding-rate threshold, 288giving-up time, 288
search image, 281
search time, 283, 284, 307–8, 309, 570seasonality
iteroparous breeding, 97migration, 170–1movements, 168–9ocean nutrient ﬂuxes, 539, 541
pollen availability, 390primary productivity, 501–2, 502, 503
solar radiation, 59, 61
species richness effects, 612temperature variation, 41
secondary productivity, 500, 516
primary production relationship, 516–17,
517
sediments, bacterial decomposers, 327–8seed banks, 101–2, 182, 272, 486seed-caching, 273seed dispersal, 176, 178, 489
fruit herbivory, 272–3mutualisms, 164–5, 387–9, 388
seed-caching/scatter-hoarding, 273seed rain, 163–4, 165
seed predation, 272, 274, 485, 520, 570, 584,
606–7
satiation (mast years), 276–7, 277
seed scatter-hoarding, 273seeds, 67, 79, 110
competition–colonization trade-off, 484dimorphism, 175dormancy, 102, 171, 172physical defenses, 83size, 116size/number trade-off, 116, 116
succession mechanisms, 484, 485
self-thinning, 156–61, 159
animal populations, 161dynamic thinning lines, 156–8, 158
geometric basis, 159–60, 160
–3/2 power law, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161resource-allocation basis, 161
species/population boundary lines, 158–9
selﬁsh herd principle, 168semelparity, 96, 97, 111, 124
age-related disperal, 176ephemeral species, 102
evolution, 121–2, 122
semiochemicals, 441senescence, 89, 95
modular organisms, 92–3, 93
serial endosymbiosis theory, 407–8, 408
serotiny, 173
sessile organisms
adaptation to environmental change, 5
competition, 137interference, 133larval disperal, 176life tables, 103self-thinning, 161
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 734SUBJECT INDEX 735
sewage disposal, 528, 536, 537, 644
phosphorus dispersal, 544, 545
sex-biased dispersal, 176
sexually transmitted disease, 358, 369, 370,
389
shading, 62, 140, 153
Shannon’s diversity index, 471shells, 83, 86
shivering, 35shoot competition, 233–4, 234
shredder detritivores, 332, 332, 333, 334,
335
sickle-cell anemia, 7
silicate, 230–1, 538, 538, 541
cycling, 328
interspeciﬁc competition, 263, 265
Simpson’s diversity index, 264, 265, 471
skewed distributions, 153
asymmetric competition, 152, 152, 153,
153
sleeping sickness, 349slug herbivory, 271–2small populations
effective population size ( N
e), 206, 207
environmental factors, 208
inbreeding depression, 206, 207
loss of genetic variation, 205, 207
population dynamics, 203, 207–9random demographic variations, 207subpopulation extinctions, 208, 209, 209
smuts, 349
snail herbivory, defensive responses, 268,
269
snowshoe hare–lynx population cycles, 298,
303, 426, 426, 427, 431–3, 432
social parasitism, 350, 385
soda lakes, 48
soil
carbon : nitrogen ratios, 337community heterogeneity, 478, 478
detritivores, 331ﬁeld capacity, 74, 75fungal decomposers (‘sugar fungi’), 327mineral resources, 75, 78, 78
nitrogen availability, 336organic matter decomposition, 336, 337pH, 47, 47
primary productivity relationship
nutrients, 505, 507, 510texture/water availability, 509, 509, 511
species richness, 628water status, 74, 74
solar radiation, 58–69
absorption, 58, 59attenuation in aquatic environments, 60,
61, 62
competition, 153, 154
germination stimulation following
dormancy, 172
hydrological cycle, 542niche differentiation, 554photosynthesis, 59
efﬁciency, 507, 507
wavebands, 59
primary productivity relationship, 501
aquatic, 512, 512, 514, 514–15
terrestrial, 505, 507, 510–11
reﬂection (R), 58, 60
resource-depletion zone (RDZ), 62shading effects, 62, 140, 153species/population boundary lines,
158–9
transmission, 58
variation in intensity/quality, 59, 61
spatial distribution seedistribution
(dispersion)
spatial scale, 167
specialist predator hypothesis, 425, 434,
435–6, 436
specialists, 79, 84, 85, 196, 279, 571
decomposers, 329
detritivores, 327optimal foraging theory, 283, 284, 285
specialization, 4
parasite–host speciﬁcity, 351
within species, 5
speciation, 9–13
allopatric, 10ecological, 10, 10
historical factors, 13–20island populations, 11, 13pre-/post-zygotic mechanisms, 10sympatric, 10
species, 9
biological (biospecies), 9, 11boundary lines, 158–9deﬁnition, 9diversity seespecies richness
interactions, 27, 225–6intraspeciﬁc variation, 5
species–area relationships, 613, 613–15, 616,
617
islands versus mainland areas, 615–16,
617
species protection plans, 646species richness, 25, 602–32
aggregated distributions, 243altitude gradients, 623, 623–4, 624benzoin gardens management, 635, 636
biotic factors, 603climatic variation, 612, 612
community characterization, 470–1, 
471
competition effects, 605
resource competition, 264, 265
decomposition effects, 627, 628
depth gradients, 624, 625
ecosystem functioning, 473, 627–30
complementarity, 629, 630facilitation, 629
environmental harshness, 611, 611
evolutional time effects, 612–13
food web connectance relationships, 588,
590, 590–1
fossil record, 626, 626–7
gap colonization, 495geographical factors, 603global estimates, 203grazing effects, 566, 566–8, 567, 568, 
569
habitat area relationship, 613–15, 616,
617
habitat diversity effects, 615–16, 616
hot spots, 18, 602intermediate disturbance hypothesis,
490–1, 491
island biogeography, 613–21latitudinal gradients, 622, 622–3
local ( αdiversity), 604–5
models, 603–4, 604
niche breadth, 603nutrient ﬂux effects, 627, 628predation response, 568, 569–71, 571,
573–4, 605
productivity relationship, 605–9, 627,
629, 629, 630, 631
regional ( γrichness), 604–5
resource range effects, 603, 605–9sampling effects, 629–30saturated versus unsaturated
communities, 604–5, 605
spatial heterogeneity effects, 609–11species turnover, 618–20, 620
successional gradients, 625, 625–6
temporally varying factors, 611–13tropical forest, 18, 18, 24
tropics, 612
species turnover, 618–20, 620
spines, 83, 268, 270Spirillaceae, nitrogen ﬁxation, 402sponges, chemical defenses, 274, 274
spores, 327, 328, 357, 489
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 735736 SUBJECT INDEX
stabilizing effects
aggregative behavior, 312–13
environmental (patch) heterogeneity,
312, 313, 314, 315, 316–18, 317, 319,
320
stable populations, 305, 411, 412
type 3 functional responses, 309–10, 310
standing crop
deﬁnition, 499
primary productivity relationship, 504–5,
505
steppes, 23stochastic fade-out, 370, 371
stock assessment, 460–2stolons, 92stomata
high temperature adaptations, 39opening, 507
crassulacean acid metabolism pathway,
71
photosynthesis, 67, 68–9
water loss, 67, 68, 75
streams
community structure, microparasite
inﬂuences, 571–2, 572
disturbance events, 50
frequency, 491–2, 492
high discharge, 18
energy ﬂow, 521
nutrient budgets, 533–4
input to terrestrial communities,
528
runoff from terrestrial communities,
526, 530
nutrient spiraling, 534, 534
productivity, 502, 503
limiting factors, 512, 512, 516
salmonid invasions, 641, 640–2
suberin, 328subpopulations seemetapopulations
substituted amide herbicides, 442substituted ureas, 442substitutive experiments, 248–9, 249
subtidal community succession, 483, 484
succession, 479, 527, 550
abandoned old ﬁelds, 482, 482, 487
agroecosystems management, 634–5animals’ role, 486–7biological mechanisms, 483–9climax, 488–9, 637coastal sand dunes, 479, 480–2
competition–colonization trade-off,
483–4, 485, 486, 493
conservation management, 639decomposers, 328
leaf litter decomposition, 328–9, 329
deﬁnition, 479
facilitation, 484
grass nitrogen utilization, 260–1, 262
interactions with enemies, 485Markov chain models, 483, 484
microcosm experiments, 497, 497
mosaic concept, 489
niche mechanisms, 483–4nitrogen-ﬁxing plants, 406patch dynamics, 489–90primary, 479–80
primary productivity : biomass
relationship (NPP : B ratios), 505
r/Kselection, 486, 493
resource-ratio hypothesis, 485, 485, 486
restoration management, 637–9
secondary, 479–80species replacement probabilities, 482–3,
483
species richness gradients, 625, 625–6
species richness inﬂuence, 603vital attributes, 485–6, 487
volcanic lava ﬂows, 479, 480, 480
succulents, 71sulfate-reducing bacteria, 328sulfur, 528, 530
atmospheric, 526
sulfur cycle, 543, 546
human activities perturbation, 544
sulfur dioxide pollution, 50, 51sunspot activity, 432surface area : volume ratios, 128Surtsey, colonization, 617–18, 619
survival, 3, 4survivorship, 106, 107
curves, 97, 100
, 100, 104
classiﬁcation, 100–1, 101
logarithmic scales, 100
parasitism effects, 361–5, 362
sustainability, 439–40, 446, 653–7
economic perspective, 653–4
role of indigenous people, 655social perspective, 655
switching food preferences, 281, 281–2, 285,
308, 309, 570, 571
symbiosis, 381–409
deﬁnition, 381
sympatric populations, 250, 251
character displacement, 251–3, 252, 253, 254
realized niche, 251
sympatric speciation, 10
synchrony, 168, 168, 171, 172taiga (northern coniferous forest), 22, 23
Takens’ theorem, 150tannins, 83, 84Temephos, 446, 446
temperate forest, 22–3, 23
biome, 470, 470
decomposers, 331postglacial period distribution, 17–18
temperate grassland, 23temperature, 30, 31, 32–41
body size dependence (temperature–size
rule), 33–4, 34
coral reef bleaching, 395, 396
day-degree concept, 33development effects, 33–4, 34, 41
germination stimulation following
dormancy, 172
growth effects, 33–4, 34
high, 39–41low, 36–9metabolism effects, 33primary productivity relationship
oceans, 514, 514–15
terrestrial environments, 505–6,
507–9, 508, 511
relative humidity interaction, 46–7spatial variation, 41species distribution correlations, 41,
44–7, 45
temporal variation, 41‘universal’ dependence relationships,
33–4
see also global climate change
temporal density-dependence, 313, 315
temporal niche differentiation, 259temporary ponds, 241
termites
fungus farms, 338, 385gut mutualistic microbiota, 338, 393, 
393
nitrogen ﬁxation, 402
terrestrial biomes, 20–4, 22
terrestrial environments
carbon sinks, 548
interspeciﬁc competition, 551nutrient budgets, 527–33
inputs, 527–8, 529
outputs, 530
parasite-mediated coexistence, 572photosynthetic efﬁciency, 507, 507
primary productivity, 500, 501
biomass relationship, 504growing season duration, 509–10, 510
limiting factors, 505–11
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 736SUBJECT INDEX 737
mineral resources, 510
soil texture, 509, 509, 511
solar radiation, 505, 507, 507, 510–11
water/temperature interrelationships,
507–9, 508, 511
productivity assessment methods, 499
vertebrate population stability, 414
territorality, 133, 154, 155–6, 156, 176, 430
coral reef ﬁshes, 495
thermal vents seehydrothermal vents
thermoneutral zone, 35, 36
thermophilic prokaryotes, 40
therophytes, 25
thiocarbamates, 442
tidal rhythms, 49–50, 168–9time-lag equation, 424time series analysis, 424–7, 425
density-dependent/-independent factors,
428–9
ﬁshery harvest management, 461, 462
toxaphene, 441trace elements, 75trade-offs
age at maturity, 121cost of reproduction, 115, 115
experimental manipulations, 113–14genetic comparisons, 113life histories, 112–15, 114, 115, 116
number/ﬁtness of offspring, 116, 116
option sets, 117succession mechanisms, 483–4
transfer, 163transfer efﬁciencies, 519–20, 520, 520, 595
assimilation efﬁciency (AE), 519, 520consumption efﬁciency (CE), 519, 519
production efﬁciency (PE), 519, 520
transient polymorphism, 6–7transmission coefﬁcient, 358, 365transmission threshold, 365transpiration, 58–9, 73, 75, 507, 542, 543
see also evapotranspiration; potential
evapotranspiration (PET)
trees
ant mutualisms, 385breeding seasons, 102community structure, 487deciduous, 68, 509distribution determinants, 474, 475
ectomycorrhizas, 397evergreen, 68, 509growth forms, 166
habitats, 381
Kselection, 124, 125
mast years, 276, 277modular organization, 92
niche differentiation, 553, 556
nitrogen-ﬁxing actinorhiza, 404
primary productivity, 504, 505, 506, 506,
509
ring-barking, 271
seasonally dry tropical forest, 68, 68
seed longevity, 172–3
senescence, 93species richness, 622
altitude gradients, 624
benzoin gardens management, 635, 636
determinants, 606, 606
triazines, 442trichomes, 83, 268, 270triﬂuralin, 442triterpene glycosides, 274trophic cascades, 580, 580, 581, 584, 641
community-/species-level, 583four-level systems, 581–3, 582
trophic levels, 516, 517–18, 518, 593–5
ecosystem productivity, 630energy transfer, 499
efﬁciency, 520, 520, 595
tropical forest, 18, 23, 24
decomposers, 331economic aspects, 654, 655
gaps colonization, 493
net primary productivity, 501
postglacial period changes, 18seasonally dry, 68
species distribution, 18, 18
species richness, 24
tropical grassland seesavannas
tropical species richness, 612, 622–3
tuberculosis, 347
tundra, 21–2, 23, 555–6, 558
decomposers, 331
underexploitation, 450unitary organisms, 89–92urbanization, 186
vaccination
measles, 370
rabies control, 377–8
variation
genetic, 3, 4
polymorphisms, 6
geographical (ecotypes), 5intraspeciﬁc, 5manmade selection pressures, 8–9
vectors
host contact rate, 358infections, 349, 369, 640parasites, 348, 357
vegetation
carbon dioxide uptake, 54community structure, 487distribution patterns, 474, 475
evapotranspiration, 75hydrological cycle, 543life form spectra, 25microclimate variation, 41postglacial period changes, 17–18solar radiation exposure, 59, 60
succession
abandoned old ﬁelds, 482, 482
coastal sand dunes, 479, 480–2, 481
competition–colonization trade-off,
483–4, 485
vital attributes, 485–6, 487
volcanic lava ﬂows, 480, 480
tundra, 21
veldt, 23vertebrates
grazing, 271
herbivore gut structure, 82immune response, 353, 353, 354, 354, 355
viruses
immune response, 353, 366
microparasites, 349plant defenses, 353
vital attributes, 485–6volcanic activity, 526, 546
volcanic lava, primary succession, 479, 480,
480
vole population cycles, 309–11VORTEX, 213
vulnerable species, 203
Wallance, Alfred Russell, 3, 4
wasps
ﬁg–ﬁg wasp mutualism, 390, 390–1
gall-forming, 354, 355
water, 73–5
conservation
crassulacean acid metabolism, 71
seasonally dry tropical forest, 68, 68
stomatal conductance, 68–9
germination stimulation following
dormancy, 172
loss
leaves to atmosphere, 75species distribution, 47temperature effects, 39, 46
metabolic, 73photosynthesis, 58, 67–9
•• ••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 737738 SUBJECT INDEX
water (Cont’d)
plant root uptake, 73–5, 76
saline conditions, 48
primary productivity relationship, 505,
507–9, 508, 511
soil texture effects, 509, 509
species richness inﬂuence, 606
see also hydrological cycle
waves, 50
weather
abundance determinant, 414, 428–9see also climate
weathering, 536, 538, 544, 546, 547
nutrient mobilization, 527
wetfall, 528, 529, 546
wetlands, 654, 655
White, Gilbert, 411whooping cough (pertussis), 367, 367
wind, 50
passive dispersal, 163–4, 165wood, 92
decomposition, 335, 335
fungal farming mutualisms, 386–7
termite gut microbiota digestion, 393
yeasts, fruit decomposition, 339
yield
density-dependent growth, 141–2, 143,
144, 156–7
self-thinning, 156–7, 160
yucca–yucca moth mutualism, 390
zero isoclines, 86, 87, 235, 235–6, 236
Allee effect, 311, 310
limitation by two resources, 261, 262, 263
Lotka–Volterra model, 299, 300
crowding effects, 304–7, 306
intraspeciﬁc competition
incorporation, 304
ratio-dependent predation, 304–5predator–prey models, 321, 322
type 3 functional response, 309, 310
vertical, 312
zinc, 528
contamination, 188
zonation
intertidal areas, 49, 49–50
barnacle competition, 228, 229
niche differentiation, 259, 259
zoonotic infection, 352
zooplankton
algal–protozoan mutualisms, 395eutrophication biomanipulation, 643, 643
lakes
nutrient cycling, 534productivity, 513
seasonal succession, 612secondary productivity, 516, 517
trophic cascades, 580, 580
zygote, 89, 92, 95
••EIPD03  10/24/05  2:22 PM  Page 738Plate 1.1 Arctic tundra, Greenland. (Courtesy of J. A. Vickery.)
EIP_Plate  10/24/05  2:24 PM  Page 1Plate 1.3 Temperate forest: (a) mixed woodland in the fall, North Carolina, USA (© The Image Bank/Arthur Mayerson) and 
(b) late summer in Beechwood, Harburn, Scotland (© Ecoscene/Wilkinson).
(a) (b)
Plate 1.2 Coniferous forest: (a) aerial view of conifer forest, Alberta, Canada (© Planet Earth Pictures/Martin King) and 
(b) a pine forest in the fall, Sweden (© Planet Earth Pictures/Jan Tove Johansson).(a) (b)EIP_Plate  10/24/05  2:24 PM  Page 2Plate 1.5 Desert: (a) summertime and (b) spring ﬂowers in Namaqualand, western South Africa. (© Planet Earth Pictures/
J. MacKinnon.)
(a) (b)Plate 1.4 Savanna. (a) Huge herds of wildebeest and common zebra seen from Naabi Hill,
Serengeti, Tanzania. (b) Grassland savanna with scattered trees. Common zebra and wildebeest 
in the western corridor of the Serengeti, Tanzania. (© Images of Africa/David Keith Jones.)
EIP_Plate  10/24/05  2:24 PM  Page 3Plate 1.6 Rainforest. (a, b) Impenetrable forest in southwest Uganda. (© Images of Africa/David
Keith Jones.)
(a)
(b)EIP_Plate  10/24/05  2:24 PM  Page 4Plate 2.1 Maps of examples of El Niño (November 1997) and La Niña (February 1999) events 
in terms of sea height above average levels. Warmer seas are higher; for example, a sea height
15–20 cm below average equates to a temperature anomaly of approximately 2–3°C. (Image fromhttp:
//topex-www.jpl.nasa.gov/science/images/el-nino-la-nina.jpg .) (See Figure 2.11. Courtesy of
NASA JPL-Caltech)
EIP_Plate  10/24/05  2:24 PM  Page 5Plate 2.2 Typical winter conditions when the NAO index is positive or negative. Conditions that
are more than usually warm (red), cold (blue), dry (orange) or wet (turquoise) are indicated. (Image
from http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/NAO/ .) (See Figure 2.11.)(d)(i)
(d)(ii)EIP_Plate  10/24/05  2:25 PM  Page 6(a)
(b)
(c)EIP_Plate  10/24/05  2:25 PM  Page 7Plate 4.1 Modular plants (on the left) and animals (on the right), showing the underlying parallels in the various ways they may be
constructed. ( previous page ) (a) Modular organisms that fall to pieces as they grow: duckweed ( Lemna sp.) and Hydra sp. (b) Freely branching
organisms in which the modules are displayed as individuals on ‘stalks’: a vegetative shoot of a higher plant ( Lonicera japonica ) with leaves
(feeding modules) and a ﬂowering shoot, and a hydroid colony ( Obelia ) bearing both feeding and reproductive modules. (c) Stoloniferous
organisms in which colonies spread laterally and remain joined by ‘stolons’ or rhizomes: a single plant of strawberry ( Fragaria ) spreading 
by means of stolons, and a colony of the hydroid Tubularia crocea . (above )  (d) Tightly packed colonies of modules: a tussock of the spotted
saxifrage ( Saxifraga bronchialis ), and a segment of the hard coral Turbinaria reniformis . (e) Modules accumulated on a long persistent, largely 
dead support: an oak tree ( Quercus robur ) in which the support is mainly the dead woody tissues derived from previous modules, and a
gorgonian coral in which the support is mainly heavily calciﬁed tissues from earlier modules.
((a) left, © Visuals Unlimited/John D. Cunningham; right, © Visuals Unlimited/Larry Stepanowicz; (b) left, © Visuals Unlimited;  
right, © Visuals Unlimited/Larry Stepanowicz; (c) left, © Visuals Unlimited/Science VU; right, © Visuals Unlimited/John D. Cunn ingham; 
(d) left, © Visuals Unlimited/Gerald and Buff Corsi; right, © Visuals Unlimited/Dave B. Fleetham; (e) left, © Visuals Unlimited /Silwood Park;
right, © Visuals Unlimited/Daniel W. Gotshall.)(d)
(e)EIP_Plate  10/24/05  2:25 PM  Page 8