Sust ainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
M. PLAN, URBAN PLANNING, 2ND SEM, SCHOOL OF PLANNING & ARCHITECTURE    
   
Sust ainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
M. PLAN, URBAN PLANNING, 2ND SEM, SCHOOL OF PLANNING & ARCHITECTURE    
  
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 2  
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
The study on the preparation of the Sustainable Development Plan of Heritage City, 
Varanasi is initiated by the Department of Urban Planning, School of Planning and 
Architecture, New Delhi as an academic exercise. The main aim is to understand and analyze 
the growth and evolution, development patterns and characteristics of a heritage city and to  
develop the broad proposals for the sustainable growth of the city.  
A heritage city is an outstanding example of a traditional human settlement, land -use, or sea -
use which is representative of a culture, or human interaction with the environment and is 
directly or tangibly associated with events or living traditions, with ideas, or with beliefs, 
with artistic and literary works of outstanding universal significance  
CHARACTERISTICS OF A HERITAGE CITY  
• A masterpiece of human creative genius; an important in terchange of human values, over 
a span of time or within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture or 
technology, Monumental arts, town -planning or landscape design;  
• A unique or at least exceptional testimony to a cultural tradition or  to a civilization which 
is living or which has disappeared;  
• A type of building, architectural or technological ensemble or landscape which illustrates 
(a) significant stage(s) in human history  
• Directly or tangibly associated with events or living traditi ons, with ideas, or with 
beliefs, with artistic and literary works of outstanding universal significance.  
• Representing major stages of earth's history, including the record of life, or significant 
geomorphic or physiographic features;  
• Containing threaten ed species of outstanding universal value from the point of view of 
science or conservation.  
GOALS, OBJECTIVES, STRATEGIES & TARGETS  
Aim: To develop Varanasi as a sustainable heritage city  
The objectives of this exercise are:  
• Understanding the characters and profile of heritage cities  
• Understanding the concerns of sustainability for heritage cities.  
• Assessment of status in terms of identification of issues sector wise.  
• Formulation of strategy for identified issues.  
Sector Wise Objectives  
• City developme nt and governance: To study the city profile, development pattern & 
governance mechanism for Varanasi to attain sustainable development.  
• People and economy: To study the demographic & economic pattern of the city.  Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 3  
 • Environment: Assessing the current statu s of environmental resources, in Varanasi with 
respect to human activities to help formulate guidelines and policies to ensure qualitative 
improvement of environment & its sustainability.  
• Infrastructure: To provide healthy, livable; physical &  social infrastructure system to the 
city so as to improve the existing and future condition for sustainable development.  
• Mobility: To assess existing mobility & give proposals based on the identified 
parameters of sustainable mobility.  
• Heritage: To stud y, analyze Varanasi city to formulate strategies to develop it into 
sustainable heritage city with sustainable tourism development.  
Scope  
• Scope would vary from municipal area boundary to Planning area boundary  
• Proposal pertaining to particulate aspect wi ll go beyond municipal area boundary.  
Limitation  
• Limitation to large scale data collection would be based on secondary data.  
• For study purpose, Municipal area boundary has been divided into five zones, namely;  
o Zone I – Core Area  
o Zone II – Trans Varuna  area  
o Zone III – South Varuna Area  
o Zone IV – South Assi Area  
o Zone V – Ramnagar area  
Varanasi  
Varanasi, also known as Benares, Banaras, or Benaras or Kashi or Kasi, is a famous Hindu 
holy city situated on the banks of the river Ganges in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. The 
city is called Kasi, "the luminous" in the Rigveda. It is often referred to as "city of temples 
and learning."  
It is the oldest living city and is heterogeneous with multiple layers of religion, culture, art 
forms, believes nature, profiles and individualities. It is a sacred and holy place to Hindu, 
Buddhist, Jain and Muslim religion. It is also the home to numerous religious monuments 
(4000 temples, 300 mosques) and is famous as a centre of music, arts, crafts, education and 
learning.  
The culture of Varanasi is deeply related with the river Ganga and the river's religious 
importance. Varanasi is known mainly for its ghats and is the religious bathing place for the 
pilgrims. The city has been a cultural and religious centre in northern India for thousands of 
years. Varanasi has its own style of classical Hindustani music, and has produced prominent 
philosophers, poets, writers and musicians in Indian history.  
The report consists of two broad segments divided into the existing situational analysis and 
the broad proposals for the following sectors of study.  Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 4  
 - City Profile  
- People an d Economy  
- Mobility  
- Infrastructure  
- Heritage and Tourism  
- Environment  
ANALYSIS  
City Profile: The city core was established in 2nd century B.C. and since then the city has 
evolved and developed with the first Master plan being prepared in 1950. The city lies on the 
banks on river ganga on the east which acts as a barrier and thus the development has taken 
on the west.  The core is organic with high density -low rise development. The outer city has 
lower density and has many town planning schemes.  
Considerable c hange in residential land use, which in the existing Master Plan account for 
almost 52% of the total land use. This increase would be due to pressing de mand for 
residential purposes.  
In 1991 proposed urbanizable area was 14,494, which got developed up to 50% i.e. 5665.90 
Ha, in 2011 proposed urbanizable area was 17927.22 which got developed up to 50% again, 
i.e. 9614.22 Ha.  City still has approximately 6790 Ha undeveloped area.  
City has around 37.6% of slum population which is one third of total populatio n encroached 
upon the government land. Slums in Ward 11and 50 Chaukaghat and Sariya have the highest 
population 8691 and 8000 population respectively. Slums in ward 72 and 41 have the lowest 
population Rewari Talab and Kameshwarmahadev 52 and 98 respective ly. Growth rate of 
Slum population is continuously increasing by 1.5 times per decade.  
People and Economy: Varanasi  is a Class II city with a total population of municipal area as 
1,201,815 (as of 2011) and total population with Urban Agglomeration is 1,4 35,113. City's 
population is increasing but growth rate is slow and declining. City has 26 % informal sector, 
which is dominating and affecting the growth rate. The growth rate for 2001 -11 has been only 
9.98%. The population density of Varanasi city, as ob served in 2011, was 15,170 persons per 
square kilometres. Huge variation in the densities ranging from 16 persons/ha to 1991 
persons/ha is observable in different wards of the town.   
Males form the majority of the population, accounting for about 53% of t he total population, 
while women form 47% and children 10.75% of the population. A large portion of the 
population falls in the working age, i.e. 15 -59 yrs. The overall literacy rate is only 78%. The 
average annual per capita income of Varanasi city is INR  1,93,616, which is higher than the 
national average of INR 68,747.  
As of 2001, Hindus made up approximately 84% of the population of Varanasi District and 
16% are Muslims with other religions accounting for only 0.4%. Except the core city, the rest 
of the  city can be observed to be mostly heterogeneous in the social composition.  Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 5  
 The overall economy of the city is dominated by tertiary sector with 56% of the total formal 
employment followed by secondary sector and primary sector with 40% and 4% respectively . 
Manufacturing industries account for the most employment, whereas trade and commerce 
stands next. Trade and commerce dominates the tertiary sector with 36% share of total formal 
employment in tertiary sector. In overall economy trade and commerce have a share of 26%. 
Manufacturing, which is the economic base, principally includes household industries and 
SSIs.  Employment in HH industries holds a high share (42%) because of the stagnant growth 
of heavy industries and limited jobs to skilled labours in it. The WFPR of Varanasi city is 
598. This includes working in the informal sector though. The industrial sector is of great 
importance as it is a major source for generation of employment and livelihood for many. 
About 32% of the working population is engaged  in formal activities.  
Mobility: The city of Varanasi can be reached through air, land and water based modes. The 
city has an international airport at a distance of about 22 km from the city. On an average 
about 3000 - 4000 people per day come through flig hts. The two railway stations in the city 
are Varanasi Cantonment station and Kashi Railway Station. On an average 15,000 -17,000 
people come via trains every day to the city. The city has two bus terminals at Cantt. and 
Kashi depot at Golgadda. But, Cantt,  terminal handles buses for both the depots. It has a 
capacity for 440 buses and on an average 12,000 -13,000 passengers come through buses per 
day to the city.  
The movement within the city is a mix of 2 -wheelers (34%), Autos (20%), cycles (16%), 
walk (14% ), 4-wheelers and cycle rickshaws (6% each) and others (4%).  
The overall mobility scenario within the city is in a poor state. The main reason can be 
attributed to poor traffic management and lack of control by the authority. Also due to heavy 
encroachmen t of roads, limited road width and lack of segregation of road spaces cause 
heavy congestion on city roads.  
Infrastructure  
Physical: Water supply system for Varanasi is as old as 125 years when it was introduced in 
year 1892. It was designed for the popula tion of 2 lakhs with a treatment plant of 33mld 
constructed at Bhelupur. At present, the Jal Nigam, which is the supply agency, supplies 
170lcpd but the users receive only 70 -80lcpd. The distribution system here is also more than 
100 years old. The lifelin e of the town is River Ganga, which takes care of approximately 
45% of the water supplied of the town.50% of the water supplied is met out of 112 deep tube 
wells operated by Jal Sansthan and remaining 5% is supplied by publicly and privately owned 
1559 han d pumps. The length of the distribution network as of now is 590km.  
The raw water extracted from Ganga River at Bhadeni gets treated at two water treatment 
plants at Bhelupur water works. Capacities of the Water Treatment Plants (WTP) are 60MLD 
(1954) and  250mld (1994). Water treatment comprise of rapid sand filters, and clear water 
sumps  Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 6  
 Only 30% of the total area is provided with underground sewer network with total length of 
about 400km due to which most of the sewage is disposed in the river Ganga with out any 
treatment. City has Trunk sewer 750mm to 2400mm which are hundred years old and the 
length of this stretch is 7.4km. There are 2 main and 5 intermittent Pumping Stations (PS) in 
the city. There are three Sewerage Treatment Plants (STPs) in Varanasi  viz. 
Dinapur,Bhagwanpur and Diesel Locomotive Works (DLW)STP. Capacities of these STPs 
are 80mld, 9.8mld and 12mld respectively.  
In Varanasi the system of door to door collection of wastes is not practiced in all parts of the 
city. People throw their wast es into the streets which are then collected by the safai 
karamacharis.  The total waste generated in the city is to the tune of 600 MT of at the rate of 
0.46 Kg per capita per day. A total of 2100 workers are associated with waste management 
where 4200 ar e required.  
Social: Varanasi has four renowned Universities, a total of 292 hospitals and 25 police 
stations distributed across the city. Varanasi city has 4 fire stations including a special fire 
station catering to the famed Kashi Vishwanath Temple. A city -level spo rts facility having 
two stadiums in an area of about 25 Acres is present in the city.  
Heritage and Tourism: Varanasi is an eclectic mix of the Tangible and Intangible, 
manifested in its rich Cultural Landscapes. The conservation and preservation of herita ge in 
Varanasi is undertaken by the Archaeological Survey of India, for about 20 sites. It has also 
prepared a listing of about 300 important monuments in various parts of the city. The tangible 
heritage includes the 84 ghats, nore than 3500 temples and mo sques, Sarnath and Banaras 
Hindu University. The intangible heritage includes the natural landscapes, and the cultural 
heritage in form of musicians, dancers and writers. INTACH had also prepared a listing of 
about 1700 heritage structures in Varanasi.  
The Master Plan of Varanasi - 2011 identifies five heritage zones in the city:  
- The Ganga River and the Riverfront Heritage Zone  
- Durgakund -Sankatmochan Area  
- Kamachcha -Bhelupura Area  
- Kabir Math (Lahartara) Area  
- Sarnath  
In tourism Varanasi is the 2nd most visited tourist city in the state of Uttar Pradesh. Total 
Inflow of Tourists in the year 2013 is 52,51,413; in which domestic tourists inflow is 95% of 
the total.  Month -wise statistics of tourist shows that the peak season for tourist inflow is 
between Oc tober to March, as all the important fairs and festivals occur within these months. 
‘Education and research’ is the first priority by International Tourists, and 
‘pilgrimage/spiritual tour’ is the main reason that attracts maximum percentage of domestic 
tourists. The tourist inflow has had an annual growth of 6.3% per year and their average stay 
is two days and one night, i.e. around 28,000 beds are needed per day to accommodate the 
inflow of tourists. But the total number of beds within the city is 13340, which is insufficient 
for the tourists.  Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 7  
 Environment: Varanasi is situated on the concave banks of River Ganga; here the river 
flows from south to north forming a crescent shape that provides Varanasi its unique 
character. The quality of water and the sust ainability of the surface water resource is under 
threat due to pollution, the main reasons for which are discharge of untreated sewage, Solid 
waste dumping, encroachment of catchment areas and religious activities particularly in case 
of River Ganga.  
the pollution is at such a high level that the amount of toxins, chemicals and other dangerous 
bacteria found in the river are now almost 3000 times over the limit suggested by the WHO 
as 'safe'. Assi Nala contributes 10 MLD of untreated sewage into River Gang a. Varuna 
receives sewage from 22 municipal drains located on both side of the river in addition to 
agricultural run -off at some selected points.  
The groundwater at certain parts of the city is found to be contaminated to Nitrate and 
Fluoride. Nitrate Cont amination is higher at the depth of 35 -48m and decreases as we dig 
deep, below 48m. The use of treated and untreated wastewater for irrigation has increased the 
contamination of Cadmium (Cd), Lead (Pb), and Nickel (Ni) in soil.  
The recreational area has re duced from 18.67% to 5.49% since 1991 and the overall average 
of city built -up to green cover ratio is 20.5:1. This shows that the city has very less green 
cover.  
Governance: The institutional setup in a city involves various stakeholders, Urban Local 
Bodi es, State Government agencies etc. These institutions perform their role within specific 
areas defined by the Government. Hence, it becomes imperative to understand the areas of 
influence of each agency, the interactions between agencies, the sector wise a ccountability of 
the agencies and the strength of these agencies in order to understand the functioning of a 
city. The main function of ‘running’ the city rests with the Nagarpalika. The Municipal 
Bodies (Urban Local Bodies) are vested with a list of funct ions delegated to them by the State 
Governments under the Municipal Legislation. These functions broadly relate to Public 
health, welfare, regulatory functions, and public safety, public works, development activities 
and provision and maintenance of basic infrastructure and services in cities and towns  
The major issues in institutional setup are that of overlapping of roles of different agencies 
and the second is deficiencies in the system.  
PROPOSALS  
The city has been divided into five zones according to t he characteristics of the city. 
According to these zones the issues have been identified and the policies and strategies have 
been proposed. The five zones are:  
1. The Core Zone : the inner part of the city near Ghats which is the heart of the city. This i s 
the main area of the city which has all the attractions of the city with the high density. All the 
main activities take place over here including the economic activities, tourism attractions and 
other religious activities.  Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 8  
 2. The Trans Varuna Zone : the area of upper Varuna which has a different characteristic. It is 
the outer city area with the new development and less density of population. In this area 
Sarnath is the only attraction for tourists and pilgrims mainly from Japan.  
3. The South Varuna Zone : it is the central area of the city which is the second highest 
density of population. It is the residential area which is unplanned.  
4. The South Assi Zone : it is the zone where the Banaras Hindu University located. It is 
another attraction of the city.  The well planned Benaras Hindu University which has a diverse 
student population  from all over the world  
5. The Trans Ganga Zone : the area outside the municipal boundary but including in the 
planning boundary. It is the area of Trans Ganga where Ram Naga r located. It is not well 
connected with the main city but now the connectivity is improving as the new bridge is 
under construction.  
The above are the five zones with their own characteristics and with their different issues. So 
the issues have been iden tified according to the sectors and Zones.  
Trade and commerce: The proposals have been categorized into different aspects based on 
the issues and analytica l pattern, these are further di vided into policy based and development 
proposals.  
Following major issues have been identified in the city through analysis:  
1. Lack of employment opportunities  
2. Lack of infrastructure and facilities  
3. Declining Handicraft and Traditional Economic Activities  
4. Monetary exploitation of tourists and lack of safety and security  
5. Chaotic Conditions in and around Religious Places  
6. Low Per Capita Income and Poor Socio -Economic Condition among different sections of 
various Social Groups  
7. Low Literacy Rate and High Rates of Child Labor  
Sustaining Heritage (Including Mobility Concerns of the City): The pressures of tourism 
growth and city expansion have had a definite toll on the rich heritage of the city. The natural 
heritage is degrading by the day, the built heritage left to dilapidati on and destruction. The 
ingenious skills and arts are dying. This highlights the need for strategies and proposals that 
will help in sustaining the heritage of the eternal city.  
The proposals for sustaining heritage of the city will also include those for  overcoming the 
mobility issues, as it is one of the major concerns associated with heritage properties and the 
city as a whole too. Sustainable tourism development is as important as heritage conservation Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 9  
 and is mutually complementary in the case of a her itage city like Varanasi, as tourism here, is 
closely interrelated with the heritage and historical aspects of the city.  
The city level proposals can be listed under various aspects listed below:  
 Listing, conservation and management of unprotected structur es: 
 Conservation of Water Bodies (Kunds)  
 Conservation and Reuse of Heritage Structures for Tourism Infrastructure  
 Revival of the Panchkroshi Yatra Marg and Rural Area Redevelopment of Pilgrimage 
Infrastructure at Night Halts  
 Development of Tourism Circuit connecting major Places of Interest in and around 
City 
 Development of Tourism Infrastructure  
 Development of Mobility Systems to improve Accessibility to Heritage Areas and 
overall City Movement  
 Continuous Tourism Surveys  
 Listing of Ghats and Riverfront Are a into the UNESCO World Heritage Sites List  
Sustainable infrastructure: The proposals for water supply and sanitation are phased into 
two phases, and based on the analysis the proposals are categorized into water supply, 
sanitation, drainage, solid waste m anagement.  
Water supply:  
 Coverage of Water Supply is increased to 100%  
 Repair of existing pipeline and WTP  
 Saving of 5 % water from NRW.  
 Enhancement of water treatment capability.  
 Community water taps at Ghats  
 Desiltation of Small Water Bodies for  
 Ground water recharging  
 Installation of New Intake Work at Bhadeni  
 Installation of SCADA System  
Sewerage:  Proposal for new pumping stations along the Varuna, interception of sewer lines 
directly releasing the waste in the river Ganga, Installation of ne w STP’s, provision of 
various methods for reusing the recycled waste water, repair and maintenance of existing 
sewer lines and adopting the DEWAT system in the areas of upcoming development.  
Drainage: Varanasi is lacking the proper drainage system in the e xisting condition. There are 
many drains which proposed are under JNNURM project. In the proposed scheme these 
drains are considered to be built. These drains will take care of the proper flow of drains in 
the zone. Along with this, most the waste from the  septic tanks is given out in Varuna River 
through drains. These  areas are to be covered with proper sewage lines in the zone. These 
sewer lines will further take the load of the waste from the septic tanks. And drains will carry 
only the storm water which  can have its outfall points in the Varuna River. The slums which Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 10  
 have inadequate toilet facilities, produce most of the sewage which moves through drains. 
Adequate facilities need to be provided in the zone mainly along the slums, so that the 
defecation a long the drains can be avoided or controlled. The community toilets will be 
provided along the slums, which will have proper sewerage system.  
Solid waste management:  
Policies: Define roles and responsibilities of agencies/departments Awarness program by 
Schools, NGOs and RWA. Promote "recycling or reuse of segregated materials” and “ensure 
community participation in waste segregation”. Cleaning of Rivers and Nalas. Recoverable 
resources are to be recycled via the existing informal sector. Implementation of  Bio-Medical 
Waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2003 to keep such waste out of domestic waste.  
Municipal solid waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2000, Hazardous waste 
(Management, Handling & trans - boundary movement) Rules 200 , Riverfront & Ghat area -
Plastic free zone.  
Environmental sustainability:  The environmental issues in Varanasi have been broadly 
categorized into 4 main issues that concern the city. They are Water Pollution, Poor Air 
Quality, Risk of Disasters and High Noise levels. Policies and strategies have been made to 
minimize the issues and to work towards sustaining the environment of Varanasi.  
Institutional Mechanism:  
Policy 1: Under UPD Act 1973, formulating of Model building byelaws and Heritage 
conservation committee, their members, a nd assigning functions and funding pattern for the 
same. Since there is a draft proposal to form Heritage committee and this committee will be 
responsible to keep a check on conservation of heritage buildings.  
These bye -laws shall apply to heritage sites listed in a notification to be issued by 
Government in bye -law-5. Provided that, these bye -laws shall not be applicable to protected 
monuments/sites/buildings and their respective prohibited and regulated areas as notified 
under
 a) Ancient Monuments and Ar chaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and Rules, 
1959 made thereunder.  
(b) The U.P. Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
Preservation Act, 1956 (U.P. Act No. VII of 1957).  
Strategy  
The Heritage conservation committee will be functioning under Ministry of Housing and 
urban planning. There would be a heritage cell under VDA which is right now de -
functioning. This cell in coordination with the Heritage cell will be responsible for 
conservation of Heritage and its surround ing areas.  
Policy2: Under Disaster management act, 2005; formation of District disaster management 
committee and preparation of city disaster management plan.  Sustainable Development of a Heritage City: Varanasi  
 
Page | 11  
 The plan is prepared to help the District Administration focus quickly on the essentials and 
crucial aspects of both preparedness and response. The plan deals with Risk Assessment and 
Vulnerability Analysis, Identification of Disaster Prone Areas, Response Structures, 
Inventory of Resources, Standard Operating Procedures, directory of Institutions  and key 
individuals etc . 